.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa and A. Wik, 1998.
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH MKDIR 1 1998-11 "GNU fileutils 4.0"
.SH NAME
mkdir \- make directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "mkdir [" options "] " directory...
.sp
POSIX options:
.BI "[\-p] [\-m " mode "] [\-\-]"
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.BI "[\-p] [\-m " mode "] [\-\-verbose]"
.BI "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mkdir
creates directories with the specified names. 
.PP
By default, the mode of created directories is 0777 (`a+rwx')
minus the bits set in the umask.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-m " mode ", \-\-mode=" mode
Set the mode of created directories to
.IR mode ,
which may be symbolic as in
.BR chmod (1)
and then uses the default mode as the point of departure.
.TP
.B "\-p, \-\-parents"
Make any missing parent directories for each 
.I directory
argument.  The mode
for parent directories is set to the umask modified by `u+wx'.
Ignore arguments corresponding to existing directories.
(Thus, if a directory /a exists, then `mkdir /a' is an error,
but `mkdir \-p /a' is not.)
.TP
.B "\-\-verbose"
Print a message for each created directory.  This is most useful
with
.BR "\-\-parents" .
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2
.SH NOTES
This page describes
.B mkdir
as found in the fileutils-4.0 package;
other versions may differ slightly.
