.\" Copyright Andries Brouwer, Ragnar Hojland Espinosa and A. Wik, 1998.
.\"
.\" This file may be copied under the conditions described
.\" in the LDP GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, Version 1, September 1998
.\" that should have been distributed together with this file.
.\"
.TH RM 1 1998-11 "GNU fileutils 4.0"
.SH NAME
rm \- remove files or directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "rm [" options "] " file...
.sp
POSIX options:
.B "[\-fiRr] [\-\-]"
.sp
GNU options (shortest form):
.B [\-dfirvR]
.B "[\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rm
removes each given
.IR file .
By default, it does not remove directories.
But when the \-r or \-R option is given, the entire directory tree
below the specified directory is removed (and there are no limitations
on the depth of directory trees that can be removed by `rm \-r').
It is an error when the last path component of
.I file
is either . or ..
(so as to avoid unpleasant surprises with `rm \-r .*' or so).
.PP
If the \-i option is given, or
if a file is unwritable, standard input is a terminal, and the
.B "\-f"
option is not given,
.B rm
prompts the user for whether to remove the file, writing a question
to stderr and reading an answer from stdin.  If the response
is not affirmative, the file is skipped.
.SH "POSIX OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-f"
Do not prompt for confirmation. Do not write diagnostic messages.
Do not produce an error return status if the only errors were
nonexisting files.
.TP
.B "\-i"
Prompt for confirmation.
(In case both \-f and \-i are given, the last one given takes effect.)
.TP
.BR "\-r" " or " "\-R"
Recursively remove directory trees.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH "SVID DETAILS"
The System V Interface Definition forbids removal of the
last link to an executable binary file that is being executed.
.SH "GNU DETAILS"
The GNU implementation (in fileutils-3.16) is broken in the sense
that there is an upper limit to the depth of hierarchies that can be
removed. (If necessary, a utility `deltree' can be used to remove
very deep trees.)
.SH "GNU OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-d, \-\-directory"
Remove directories with
.BR unlink (2)
instead of 
.BR rmdir (2),
and don't
require a directory to be empty before trying to unlink it.  Only
works if you have appropriate privileges.  Because unlinking a
directory causes any files in the deleted directory to become
unreferenced, it is wise to 
.BR fsck (8)
the filesystem after doing this.
.TP
.B "\-f, \-\-force"
Ignore nonexistent files and never prompt the user.
.TP
.B "\-i, \-\-interactive"
Prompt whether to remove each file. If the response is not affirmative,
the file is skipped.
.TP
.B "\-r, \-R, \-\-recursive"
Remove the contents of directories recursively.
.TP
.B "\-v, \-\-verbose"
Print the name of each file before removing it.
.SH "GNU STANDARD OPTIONS"
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
Print a usage message on standard output and exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-version"
Print version information on standard output, then exit successfully.
.TP
.B "\-\-"
Terminate option list.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The variables LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_CTYPE and LC_MESSAGES have the
usual meaning.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.2, except for the limitation on file hierarchy depth.
.SH NOTES
This page describes
.B rm
as found in the fileutils-4.0 package;
other versions may differ slightly.
.LP
Sometimes one wishes to recover deleted files.
It helps to have backups. It helps to use a trash directory,
so that removed files are only moved to the trash. But actually
removed files, although gone in principle, can sometimes be recovered.
For details for the ext2 filesystem, see the Ext2fs-Undeletion mini-Howto.
