.\" Copyright (c) 2017 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH SYSFS 5 2017-09-10 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sysfs \- a filesystem for exporting kernel objects
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B sysfs
filesystem is a pseudo-filesystem which provides an interface to
kernel data structures.
(More precisely, the files and directories in
.B sysfs
provide a view of the
.IR kobject
structures defined internally within the kernel.)
The files under
.B sysfs
provide information about devices, kernel modules, filesystems,
and other kernel components.
.PP
The
.B sysfs
filesystem is commonly mounted at
.IR /sys .
Typically, it is mounted automatically by the system,
but it can also be mounted manually using a command such as:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
mount \-t sysfs sysfs /sys
.EE
.in
.PP
Many of the files in the
.B sysfs
filesystem are read-only,
but some files are writable, allowing kernel variables to be changed.
To avoid redundancy,
symbolic links are heavily used to connect entries across the filesystem tree.
.\"
.SS Files and directories
The following list describes some of the files and directories under the
.I /sys
hierarchy.
.TP
.IR /sys/block
This subdirectory contains one symbolic link for each block device
that has been discovered on the system.
The symbolic links point to corresponding directories under
.IR /sys/devices .
.TP
.IR /sys/bus
This directory contains one subdirectory for each of the bus types
in the kernel.
Inside each of these directories are two subdirectories:
.RS
.TP
.IR devices
This subdirectory contains symbolic links to entries in
.IR /sys/devices
that correspond to the devices discovered on this bus.
.TP
.IR drivers
This subdirectory contains one subdirectory for each device driver
that is loaded on this bus.
.RE
.TP
.IR /sys/class
This subdirectory contains a single layer of further subdirectories
for each of the device classes that have been registered on the system
(e.g., terminals, network devices, block devices, graphics devices,
sound devices, and so on).
Inside each of these subdirectories are symbolic links for each of the
devices in this class.
These symbolic links refer to entries in the
.IR /sys/devices
directory.
.TP
.IR /sys/dev
This directory contains two subdirectories
.IR block /
and
.IR char/ ,
corresponding, respectively,
to the block and character devices on the system.
Inside each of these subdirectories are symbolic links with names of the form
.IR major-ID : minor-ID ,
where the ID values correspond to the major and minor ID of a specific device.
Each symbolic link points to the
.B sysfs
directory for a device.
The symbolic links inside
.IR /sys/dev
thus provide an easy way to look up the
.B sysfs
interface using the device IDs returned by a call to
.BR stat (2)
(or similar).
.IP
The following shell session shows an example from
.IR /sys/dev :
.IP
.in +4n
.EX
$ \fBstat \-c "%t %T" /dev/null\fP
1 3
$ \fBreadlink /sys/dev/char/1\\:3\fP
\&../../devices/virtual/mem/null
$ \fBls \-Fd /sys/devices/virtual/mem/null\fP
/sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/
$ \fBls \-d1 /sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/*\fP
/sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/dev
/sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/power/
/sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/subsystem@
/sys/devices/virtual/mem/null/uevent
.EE
.in
.TP
.IR /sys/devices
This is a directory that contains a filesystem representation of
the kernel device tree,
which is a hierarchy of
.I device
structures within the kernel.
.TP
.IR /sys/firmware
This subdirectory contains interfaces for viewing and manipulating
firmware-specific objects and attributes.
.TP
.IR /sys/fs
This directory contains subdirectories for some filesystems.
A filesystem will have a subdirectory here only if it chose
to explicitly create the subdirectory.
.TP
.IR /sys/fs/cgroup
This directory conventionally is used as a mount point for a
.BR tmpfs (5)
filesystem containing mount points for
.BR cgroups (7)
filesystems.
.TP
.IR /sys/hypervisor
[To be documented]
.TP
.IR /sys/kernel
This subdirectory contains various files and subdirectories that provide
information about the running kernel.
.TP
.IR /sys/module
This subdirectory contains one subdirectory
for each module that is loaded into the kernel.
The name of each directory is the name of the module.
In each of the subdirectories, there may be following files:
.RS
.TP
.I coresize
[to be documented]
.TP
.I initsize
[to be documented]
.TP
.I initstate
[to be documented]
.TP
.I refcnt
[to be documented]
.TP
.I srcversion
[to be documented]
.TP
.I taint
[to be documented]
.TP
.I uevent
[to be documented]
.TP
.I version
[to be documented]
.RE
.IP
In each of the subdirectories, there may be following subdirectories:
.RS
.TP
.I drivers
[To be documented]
.TP
.I holders
[To be documented]
.TP
.I notes
[To be documented]
.TP
.I parameters
This directory contains one file for each module parameter,
with each file containing the value of the corresponding parameter.
Some of these files are writable, allowing the
.TP
.I sections
This subdirectories contains files with information about module sections.
This information is mainly used for debugging.
.TP
.I
[To be documented]
.RE
.TP
.IR /sys/power
[To be documented]
.SH VERSIONS
The
.B sysfs
filesystem first appeared in Linux 2.6.0.
.SH CONFORMING TO
The
.B sysfs
filesystem is Linux-specific.
.SH NOTES
This manual page is incomplete, possibly inaccurate, and is the kind
of thing that needs to be updated very often.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR proc (5),
.BR udev (7)
.PP
P. Mochel. (2005).
.IR "The sysfs filesystem" .
Proceedings of the 2005 Ottawa Linux Symposium.
.\" https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/people/mochel/doc/papers/ols-2005/mochel.pdf
.PP
The kernel source file
.I Documentation/filesystems/sysfs.txt
and various other files in
.IR Documentation/ABI
and
.IR Documentation/*/sysfs.txt
