.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 1992 Drew Eckhardt;
.\"                               1993 Michael Haardt, Ian Jackson.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified Wed Jul 21 19:42:57 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Sun Jul 21 21:25:26 1996 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified Wed Nov  6 03:46:05 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH ALARM 2 1993-07-21 Linux "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
alarm \- set an alarm clock for delivery of a signal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "unsigned int alarm(unsigned int " seconds );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR alarm " arranges for a " SIGALRM
signal to be delivered to the process in
.I seconds
seconds.

If
.I seconds
is zero, no new
.B alarm
is scheduled.

In any event any previously set
.B alarm
is cancelled.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.B alarm
returns the number of seconds remaining until any previously scheduled
alarm was due to be delivered, or zero if there was no previously
scheduled alarm.
.SH NOTES
.BR alarm " and " setitimer
share the same timer; calls to one will interfere with use of the
other.
.PP
.B sleep()
may be implemented using
.BR SIGALRM ;
mixing calls to
.B alarm()
and
.B sleep()
is a bad idea.

Scheduling delays can, as ever, cause the execution of the process to
be delayed by an arbitrary amount of time.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gettimeofday (2),
.BR pause (2),
.BR select (2),
.BR setitimer (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sleep (3)
