.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Portions extracted from /usr/include/sys/socket.h, which does not have
.\" any authorship information in it.  It is probably available under the GPL.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.\" Other portions are from the 6.9 (Berkeley) 3/10/91 man page:
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"     This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"     California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Modified Mon Oct 21 23:05:29 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1998 by Andi Kleen
.\" $Id: bind.2,v 1.3 1999/04/23 19:56:07 freitag Exp $
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.TH BIND 2 2004-06-23 "Linux 2.6.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
bind \- bind a name to a socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int bind(int " sockfd ", struct sockaddr *" my_addr ", socklen_t " addrlen );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bind
gives the socket
.I sockfd
the local address
.IR my_addr .
.I my_addr
is
.I addrlen
bytes long.  Traditionally, this is called \(lqassigning a name to a socket.\(rq
When a socket is created with
.BR socket (2),
it exists in a name space (address family) but has no name assigned.
.PP
It is normally necessary to assign a local address using
.B bind
before a
.B SOCK_STREAM
socket may receive connections (see
.BR accept (2)).

The rules used in name binding vary between address families.  Consult
the manual entries in Section 7 for detailed information. For
.B AF_INET
see
.BR ip (7),
for
.B AF_UNIX
see
.BR unix (7),
for
.B AF_APPLETALK
see
.BR ddp (7),
for
.B AF_PACKET
see
.BR packet (7),
for
.B AF_X25
see
.BR x25 (7)
and for
.B AF_NETLINK
see
.BR netlink (7).

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EACCES
The address is protected, and the user is not the super-user.
.TP
.B EBADF
.I sockfd
is not a valid descriptor.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The socket is already bound to an address.  This may change in the future:
see
.I linux/unix/sock.c
for details.
.TP
.B ENOTSOCK
Argument is a descriptor for a file, not a socket.
.PP
The following errors are specific to UNIX domain 
.RB ( AF_UNIX ) 
sockets:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied on a component of the path prefix.
(See also
.BR path_resolution (2).)
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I my_addr
points outside the user's accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The
.I addrlen
is wrong, or the socket was not in the
.B AF_UNIX
family.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.IR my_addr .
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I my_addr
is too long.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP
.B EROFS
The socket inode would reside on a read-only file system.
.SH BUGS
The transparent proxy options are not described.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, 4.4BSD (the
.B bind
function first appeared in BSD 4.2).  SVr4 documents additional
.BR EADDRNOTAVAIL , 
.BR EADDRINUSE , 
and
.B ENOSR 
general error conditions, and
additional 
.B EIO
and
.B EISDIR
Unix-domain error conditions.
.SH NOTE
The third argument of
.B bind
is in reality an int (and this is what BSD 4.* and libc4 and libc5 have).
Some POSIX confusion resulted in the present socklen_t, also used by glibc.
See also
.BR accept (2).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR accept (2),
.BR connect (2),
.BR getsockname (2),
.BR listen (2),
.BR path_resolution (2),
.BR socket (2),
.BR ip (7),
.BR socket (7)
