.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-21 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1995-04-15 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added 'fchdir'. Fixed bugs in error section.
.\" Modified 1996-10-21 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1997-08-21 by Joseph S. Myers <jsm28@cam.ac.uk>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.TH CHDIR 2 2004-06-23 "Linux 2.6.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
chdir, fchdir \- change working directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int chdir(const char *" path );
.br
.BI "int fchdir(int " fd );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chdir
changes the current directory to that specified in
.IR path .
.PP
.B fchdir
is identical to
.BR chdir ;
the only difference is that the directory is given as an
open file descriptor.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
Depending on the file system, other errors can be returned.  The more
general errors for
.B chdir
are listed below:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied for one of the directories in the path prefix of
.IR path .
(See also
.BR path_resolution (2).)
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
points outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error occurred.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.IR path .
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I path
is too long.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of
.I path
is not a directory.
.PP
The general errors for
.B fchdir
are listed below:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission was denied on the directory open on
.IR fd .
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.SH NOTES
The prototype for
.B fchdir
is only available if
.B _BSD_SOURCE
is defined (either explicitly, or implicitly, by not defining
_POSIX_SOURCE or compiling with the -ansi flag).
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The 
.B chdir
call is compatible with SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, 4.4BSD.  SVr4 documents
additional EINTR, ENOLINK, and EMULTIHOP error conditions but has
no ENOMEM.  POSIX.1 does not have ENOMEM or ELOOP error conditions.
X/OPEN does not have EFAULT, ENOMEM or EIO error conditions.

The
.B fchdir
call is compatible with SVr4, 4.4BSD and X/OPEN.
SVr4 documents additional EIO, EINTR, and ENOLINK error conditions.
X/OPEN documents additional EINTR and EIO error conditions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR chroot (2),
.BR path_resolution (2),
.BR getcwd (3)
