.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\" and Copyright (C) 2006, 2014 Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-21 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1997-01-12 by Michael Haardt
.\"   <michael@cantor.informatik.rwth-aachen.de>: NFS details
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH CHMOD 2 2021-08-27 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
chmod, fchmod, fchmodat \- change permissions of a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/stat.h>
.PP
.BI "int chmod(const char *" pathname ", mode_t " mode );
.BI "int fchmod(int " fd ", mode_t " mode );
.PP
.BR "#include <fcntl.h>" "           /* Definition of AT_* constants */"
.B #include <sys/stat.h>
.PP
.BI "int fchmodat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ", mode_t " \
mode ", int " flags );
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.nf
.BR fchmod ():
    Since glibc 2.24:
        _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 199309L
.\"        || (_XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED)
    Glibc 2.19 to 2.23
        _POSIX_C_SOURCE
    Glibc 2.16 to 2.19:
        _BSD_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE
    Glibc 2.12 to 2.16:
        _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 500
            || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
    Glibc 2.11 and earlier:
        _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 500
.\"        || (_XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED)
.fi
.PP
.BR fchmodat ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.10:
        _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
    Before glibc 2.10:
        _ATFILE_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR chmod ()
and
.BR fchmod ()
system calls change a file's mode bits.
(The file mode consists of the file permission bits plus the set-user-ID,
set-group-ID, and sticky bits.)
These system calls differ only in how the file is specified:
.IP * 2
.BR chmod ()
changes the mode of the file specified whose pathname is given in
.IR pathname ,
which is dereferenced if it is a symbolic link.
.IP *
.BR fchmod ()
changes the mode of the file referred to by the open file descriptor
.IR fd .
.PP
The new file mode is specified in
.IR mode ,
which is a bit mask created by ORing together zero or
more of the following:
.TP 18
.BR S_ISUID "  (04000)"
set-user-ID (set process effective user ID on
.BR execve (2))
.TP
.BR S_ISGID "  (02000)"
set-group-ID (set process effective group ID on
.BR execve (2);
mandatory locking, as described in
.BR fcntl (2);
take a new file's group from parent directory, as described in
.BR chown (2)
and
.BR mkdir (2))
.TP
.BR S_ISVTX "  (01000)"
sticky bit (restricted deletion flag, as described in
.BR unlink (2))
.TP
.BR S_IRUSR "  (00400)"
read by owner
.TP
.BR S_IWUSR "  (00200)"
write by owner
.TP
.BR S_IXUSR "  (00100)"
execute/search by owner ("search" applies for directories,
and means that entries within the directory can be accessed)
.TP
.BR S_IRGRP "  (00040)"
read by group
.TP
.BR S_IWGRP "  (00020)"
write by group
.TP
.BR S_IXGRP "  (00010)"
execute/search by group
.TP
.BR S_IROTH "  (00004)"
read by others
.TP
.BR S_IWOTH "  (00002)"
write by others
.TP
.BR S_IXOTH "  (00001)"
execute/search by others
.PP
The effective UID of the calling process must match the owner of the file,
or the process must be privileged (Linux: it must have the
.B CAP_FOWNER
capability).
.PP
If the calling process is not privileged (Linux: does not have the
.B CAP_FSETID
capability), and the group of the file does not match
the effective group ID of the process or one of its
supplementary group IDs, the
.B S_ISGID
bit will be turned off,
but this will not cause an error to be returned.
.PP
As a security measure, depending on the filesystem,
the set-user-ID and set-group-ID execution bits
may be turned off if a file is written.
(On Linux, this occurs if the writing process does not have the
.B CAP_FSETID
capability.)
On some filesystems, only the superuser can set the sticky bit,
which may have a special meaning.
For the sticky bit, and for set-user-ID and set-group-ID bits on
directories, see
.BR inode (7).
.PP
On NFS filesystems, restricting the permissions will immediately influence
already open files, because the access control is done on the server, but
open files are maintained by the client.
Widening the permissions may be
delayed for other clients if attribute caching is enabled on them.
.\"
.\"
.SS fchmodat()
The
.BR fchmodat ()
system call operates in exactly the same way as
.BR chmod (),
except for the differences described here.
.PP
If the pathname given in
.I pathname
is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
referred to by the file descriptor
.I dirfd
(rather than relative to the current working directory of
the calling process, as is done by
.BR chmod ()
for a relative pathname).
.PP
If
.I pathname
is relative and
.I dirfd
is the special value
.BR AT_FDCWD ,
then
.I pathname
is interpreted relative to the current working
directory of the calling process (like
.BR chmod ()).
.PP
If
.I pathname
is absolute, then
.I dirfd
is ignored.
.PP
.I flags
can either be 0, or include the following flag:
.TP
.B AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW
If
.I pathname
is a symbolic link, do not dereference it:
instead operate on the link itself.
This flag is not currently implemented.
.PP
See
.BR openat (2)
for an explanation of the need for
.BR fchmodat ().
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
Depending on the filesystem,
errors other than those listed below can be returned.
.PP
The more general errors for
.BR chmod ()
are listed below:
.TP
.B EACCES
Search permission is denied on a component of the path prefix.
(See also
.BR path_resolution (7).)
.TP
.B EBADF
.RB ( fchmod ())
The file descriptor
.I fd
is not valid.
.TP
.B EBADF
.RB ( fchmodat ())
.I pathname
is relative but
.I dirfd
is neither
.B AT_FDCWD
nor a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I pathname
points outside your accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.RB ( fchmodat ())
Invalid flag specified in
.IR flags .
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error occurred.
.TP
.B ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in resolving
.IR pathname .
.TP
.B ENAMETOOLONG
.I pathname
is too long.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The file does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.RB ( fchmodat ())
.I pathname
is relative and
.I dirfd
is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.TP
.B ENOTSUP
.RB ( fchmodat ())
.I flags
specified
.BR AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW ,
which is not supported.
.TP
.B EPERM
The effective UID does not match the owner of the file,
and the process is not privileged (Linux: it does not have the
.B CAP_FOWNER
capability).
.TP
.B EPERM
The file is marked immutable or append-only.
(See
.BR ioctl_iflags (2).)
.TP
.B EROFS
The named file resides on a read-only filesystem.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR fchmodat ()
was added to Linux in kernel 2.6.16;
library support was added to glibc in version 2.4.
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR chmod (),
.BR fchmod ():
4.4BSD, SVr4, POSIX.1-2001i, POSIX.1-2008.
.PP
.BR fchmodat ():
POSIX.1-2008.
.SH NOTES
.SS C library/kernel differences
The GNU C library
.BR fchmodat ()
wrapper function implements the POSIX-specified
interface described in this page.
This interface differs from the underlying Linux system call, which does
.I not
have a
.I flags
argument.
.SS Glibc notes
On older kernels where
.BR fchmodat ()
is unavailable, the glibc wrapper function falls back to the use of
.BR chmod ().
When
.I pathname
is a relative pathname,
glibc constructs a pathname based on the symbolic link in
.IR /proc/self/fd
that corresponds to the
.IR dirfd
argument.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chmod (1),
.BR chown (2),
.BR execve (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR inode (7),
.BR path_resolution (7),
.BR symlink (7)
