.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH FACCESSAT 2 2014-01-21 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
faccessat \- check user's permissions of a file relative to a \
directory file descriptor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>           /* Definition of AT_* constants */
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int faccessat(int " dirfd ", const char *" pathname ", int " \
mode ", int " flags );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.sp
.BR faccessat ():
.PD 0
.ad l
.RS 4
.TP 4
Since glibc 2.10:
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700 || _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.TP
Before glibc 2.10:
_ATFILE_SOURCE
.RE
.ad
.PD
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR faccessat ()
system call operates in exactly the same way as
.BR access (2),
except for the differences described in this manual page.

If the pathname given in
.I pathname
is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
referred to by the file descriptor
.I dirfd
(rather than relative to the current working directory of
the calling process, as is done by
.BR access (2)
for a relative pathname).

If
.I pathname
is relative and
.I dirfd
is the special value
.BR AT_FDCWD ,
then
.I pathname
is interpreted relative to the current working
directory of the calling process (like
.BR access (2)).

If
.I pathname
is absolute, then
.I dirfd
is ignored.

.I flags
is constructed by ORing together zero or more of the following values:
.TP
.B AT_EACCESS
Perform access checks using the effective user and group IDs.
By default,
.BR faccessat ()
uses the real IDs (like
.BR access (2)).
.TP
.B AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW
If
.I pathname
is a symbolic link, do not dereference it:
instead return information about the link itself.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, (all requested permissions granted)
.BR faccessat ()
returns 0.
On error, \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
The same errors that occur for
.BR access (2)
can also occur for
.BR faccessat ().
The following additional errors can occur for
.BR faccessat ():
.TP
.B EBADF
.I dirfd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Invalid flag specified in
.IR flags .
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.I pathname
is relative and
.I dirfd
is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR faccessat ()
was added to Linux in kernel 2.6.16;
library support was added to glibc in version 2.4.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX.1-2008.
.SH NOTES
See
.BR openat (2)
for an explanation of the need for
.BR faccessat ().

.IR Warning :
.BR faccessat ()
is subject to the same kinds of races as
.BR access (2)
and
.BR euidaccess (3).
.SS Glibc notes
The raw system call takes only the first three arguments.
The
.B AT_EACCESS
and
.B AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW
flags are actually implemented within the glibc wrapper function for
.BR faccessat ().
If either of these flags is specified, then the wrapper function employs
.BR fstatat (2)
to determine access permissions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR access (2),
.BR openat (2),
.BR euidaccess (3),
.BR credentials (7),
.BR path_resolution (7),
.BR symlink (7)
