.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\"
.TH FUTIMESAT 2 2006-05-05 "Linux 2.6.16" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
futimes \- change timestamps of a file relative to a \
directory file descriptor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>
.sp
.BI "int futimesat(int " dirfd ", const char *" path , 
.BI "              const struct timeval " times [2]);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR futimesat ()
system call operates in exactly the same way as
.BR utimes (2),
except for the differences described in this manual page.

If the pathname given in 
.I pathname
is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
referred to by the file descriptor
.IR dirfd 
(rather than relative to the current working directory of 
the calling process, as is done by
.BR utimes (2)
for a relative pathname).

If the pathname given in 
.I pathname
is relative and 
.I dirfd
is the special value
.BR AT_FDCWD ,
then
.I pathname
is interpreted relative to the current working 
directory of the calling process (like
.BR utimes (2)).

If the pathname given in
.IR pathname
is absolute, then 
.I dirfd 
is ignored.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.BR futimesat () 
returns a 0.
On error, \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
The same errors that occur for
.BR utimes (2)
can also occur for
.BR futimesat ().
The following additional errors can occur for 
.BR futimesat ():
.TP
.B EBADF
.I dirfd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.I pathname
is a relative path and
.I dirfd
is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This system call is non-standard but is proposed
for inclusion in a future revision of POSIX.1.
A similar system call exists on Solaris.
.SH GLIBC NOTES
If the
.I path
argument is NULL, then the glibc 
.BR futimes ()
wrapper function updates the times for the file referred to by
.IR dirfd .
.\" The Solaris futimesat() also has this strangeness.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR futimesat ()
was added to Linux in kernel 2.6.16.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR path_resolution (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR utimes (2),
.BR futimes (3)
