.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt, March 28, 1992
.\" and Copyright (c) 2002 Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2004-11-16 -- mtk: the getrlimit.2 page, which formerly included
.\" coverage of getrusage(2), has been split, so that the latter is
.\" now covered in its own getrusage.2.  For older details of change
.\" history, etc., see getrlimit.2
.\"
.\" Modified 2004-11-16, mtk, Noted that the non-conformance
.\"	when SIGCHLD is being ignored is fixed in 2.6.9.
.\" 2008-02-22, Sripathi Kodi <sripathik@in.ibm.com>: Document RUSAGE_THREAD
.\" 2008-05-25, mtk, clarify RUSAGE_CHILDREN + other clean-ups.
.\"
.TH GETRUSAGE 2 2009-08-25 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getrusage \- get resource usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/time.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/resource.h>
.sp
.BI "int getrusage(int " who ", struct rusage *" usage );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.BR getrusage ()
returns resource usage measures for
.IR who ,
which can be one of the following:
.TP
.B RUSAGE_SELF
Return resource usage statistics for the calling process,
which is the sum of resources used by all threads in the process.
.TP
.B RUSAGE_CHILDREN
Return resource usage statistics for all children of the
calling process that have terminated and been waited for.
These statistics will include the resources used by grandchildren,
and further removed descendants,
if all of the intervening descendants waited on their terminated children.
.TP
.BR RUSAGE_THREAD " (since Linux 2.6.26)"
Return resource usage statistics for the calling thread.
.PP
The resource usages are returned in the structure pointed to by
.IR usage ,
which has the following form:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct rusage {
    struct timeval ru_utime; /* user time used */
    struct timeval ru_stime; /* system time used */
    long   ru_maxrss;        /* maximum resident set size */
    long   ru_ixrss;         /* integral shared memory size */
    long   ru_idrss;         /* integral unshared data size */
    long   ru_isrss;         /* integral unshared stack size */
    long   ru_minflt;        /* page reclaims */
    long   ru_majflt;        /* page faults */
    long   ru_nswap;         /* swaps */
    long   ru_inblock;       /* block input operations */
    long   ru_oublock;       /* block output operations */
    long   ru_msgsnd;        /* messages sent */
    long   ru_msgrcv;        /* messages received */
    long   ru_nsignals;      /* signals received */
    long   ru_nvcsw;         /* voluntary context switches */
    long   ru_nivcsw;        /* involuntary context switches */
};
.fi
.in
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I usage
points outside the accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I who
is invalid.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, 4.3BSD.
POSIX.1-2001 specifies
.BR getrusage (),
but only specifies the fields
.I ru_utime
and
.IR ru_stime .

.B RUSAGE_THREAD
is Linux-specific.
.SH NOTES
Resource usage metrics are preserved across an
.BR execve (2).

Including
.I <sys/time.h>
is not required these days, but increases portability.
(Indeed,
.I struct timeval
is defined in
.IR <sys/time.h> .)
.PP
In Linux kernel versions before 2.6.9, if the disposition of
.B SIGCHLD
is set to
.B SIG_IGN
then the resource usages of child processes
are automatically included in the value returned by
.BR RUSAGE_CHILDREN ,
although POSIX.1-2001 explicitly prohibits this.
This non-conformance is rectified in Linux 2.6.9 and later.
.\" See the description of getrusage() in XSH.
.\" A similar statement was also in SUSv2.
.LP
The structure definition shown at the start of this page
was taken from 4.3BSD Reno.
Not all fields are meaningful under Linux.
In Linux 2.4 only the fields
.IR ru_utime ,
.IR ru_stime ,
.IR ru_minflt ,
and
.I ru_majflt
are maintained.
Since Linux 2.6,
.I ru_nvcsw
and
.I ru_nivcsw
are also maintained.
Since Linux 2.6.22,
.I ru_inblock
and
.I ru_oublock
are also maintained.

See also the description of
.IR /proc/PID/stat
in
.BR proc (5).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR clock_gettime (2),
.BR getrlimit (2),
.BR times (2),
.BR wait (2),
.BR wait4 (2),
.BR clock (3)
