.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1997 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified, 2003-05-26, Michael Kerrisk, <mtk16@ext,canterbury.ac.nz>
.TH GETRESUID 2 2003-05-26 "Linux 2.4" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getresuid, getresgid \- get real, effective and saved user or group ID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.br
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int getresuid(uid_t *" ruid ", uid_t *" euid ", uid_t *" suid );
.br
.BI "int getresgid(gid_t *" rgid ", gid_t *" egid ", gid_t *" sgid ); 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B getresuid
and
.B getresgid
(both introduced in Linux 2.1.44)
get the real, effective and saved user ID's (resp. group ID's)
of the current process.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
One of the arguments specified an address outside the calling program's
address space.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This call is Linux-specific.
The prototype is given by glibc since version 2.3.2
provided _GNU_SOURCE is defined.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getuid (2),
.BR setresuid (2),
.BR setreuid (2),
.BR setuid (2)
