.\" Copyright (C) 1996 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" and Copyright (C) 2016 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Thu Oct 31 14:18:40 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@y\thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2001-12-17, aeb
.TH GETSID 2 2016-03-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getsid \- get session ID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "pid_t getsid(pid_t" " pid" );
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.sp
.ad l
.PD 0
.BR getsid ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.\"    || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ &&\ _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
.br
    || /* Since glibc 2.12: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.RE
.PD
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I getsid(0)
returns the session ID of the calling process.
.BR getsid ()
returns the session ID of the process with process ID
.IR pid .
If
.I pid
is 0,
.BR getsid ()
returns the session ID of the calling process.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, a session ID is returned.
On error, \fI(pid_t)\ \-1\fP will be returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EPERM
A process with process ID
.I pid
exists, but it is not in the same session as the calling process,
and the implementation considers this an error.
.TP
.B ESRCH
No process with process ID
.I pid
was found.
.SH VERSIONS
This system call is available on Linux since version 2.0.
.\" Linux has this system call since Linux 1.3.44.
.\" There is libc support since libc 5.2.19.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008, SVr4.
.SH NOTES
Linux does not return
.BR EPERM .

See
.BR credentials (7)
for a description of sessions and session IDs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR getpgid (2),
.BR setsid (2),
.BR credentials (7)
