.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1993 Rickard E. Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Historical remark, aeb, 2004-06-05
.TH GETUID 2 1993-07-23 "Linux 0.99.11" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getuid, geteuid \- get user identity
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.sp
.B uid_t getuid(void);
.br
.B uid_t geteuid(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B getuid
returns the real user ID of the current process.

.B geteuid
returns the effective user ID of the current process.

The real ID corresponds to the ID of the calling process.  The effective ID
corresponds to the set ID bit on the file being executed.
.SH ERRORS
These functions are always successful.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX, BSD 4.3.
.SH HISTORY
In Unix V6 the \fBgetuid()\fP call returned (euid << 8) + uid.
Unix V7 introduced separate calls \fBgetuid()\fP and \fBgeteuid()\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR setreuid (2),
.BR setuid (2)
