.\" man2/inotify_init.2 - inotify_init man page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2005 Robert Love
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 2005-07-19 Robert Love <rlove@rlove.org> - initial version
.\" 2006-02-07 mtk, minor changes
.\"
.TH INOTIFY_INIT 2 2006-02-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
inotify_init \- initialize an inotify instance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/inotify.h>
.sp
.BI "int inotify_init(void)"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR inotify_init ()
initializes a new inotify instance and returns a file descriptor associated
with a new inotify event queue.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.BR inotify_init ()
returns a new file descriptor, or \-1 if an error occurred (in which
case,
.I errno
is set appropriately).
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EMFILE
The user limit on the total number of inotify instances has been reached.
.TP
.B ENFILE
The system limit on the total number of file descriptors has been reached.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory is available.
.SH "HISTORY"
Inotify was merged into the 2.6.13 Linux kernel.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This system call is Linux specific.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR inotify_add_watch (2),
.BR inotify_rm_watch (2), 
.BR inotify (7).
