.\" man2/inotify_add_watch.2 - inotify_add_watch man page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2005 Robert Love, 2006 Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 2005-07-19 Robert Love <rlove@rlove.org> - initial version
.\" 2006-02-07 mtk, various changes
.\"
.TH INOTIFY_ADD_WATCH 2 2006-02-07 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
inotify_add_watch \- add a watch to an initialized inotify instance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <inotify.h>
.sp
.BI "int inotify_add_watch(int " fd ", const char *" path ", uint32_t " mask );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR inotify_add_watch ()
adds a watch on the file at pathname
.I path
to the inotify instance mapped by the file descriptor
.I fd
with the event mask given by the bitmask
.IR mask .
See
.BR inotify (7)
for a description of the bits that can be set in
.IR mask .

A successful call to
.BR inotify_add_watch ()
returns the unique watch descriptor associated with 
.I path
for this inotify instance.
If 
.I path
was not previously being watched by this inotify instance,
then the watch descriptor is newly allocated, 
with a number that is unique for this inotify instance.
If
.I path
was already being watched, then the descriptor
for the existing watch is returned.

The watch descriptor is returned by later
.BR read (2)s
from the inotify file descriptor. 
These reads fetch
.I inotify_event
structures indicating file system events; 
the returned watch descriptor identifies
the object for which the event occurred.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.BR inotify_add_watch ()
returns a non-negative watch descriptor.
On error \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EACCESS
Read access to the given file is not permitted.
.TP
.B EBADF
The given file descriptor is not valid.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I path
points outside of the process's accessible address space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The given event mask contains no legal events.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient kernel memory was available.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
The user limit on the total number of inotify watches was reached or the
kernel failed to allocate a needed resource.
.SH "HISTORY"
Inotify was merged into the 2.6.13 Linux kernel.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This system call is Linux specific.
.SH "BUGS"
In kernels before 2.6.16, the
.B IN_ONESHOT
.I mask 
flag does not work.
.\" FIXME To be confirmed that the IN_ONESHOT fix made by Robert Love did 
.\" actually make it into 2.6.16. (8 Feb 06)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR inotify_init (2),
.BR inotify_rm_watch (2), 
.BR inotify (7).
