.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     @(#)ioctl.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-23 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1999-06-25 by Rachael Munns <vashti@dream.org.uk>
.\" Modified 2000-09-21 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\"
.TH IOCTL 2 2021-03-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ioctl \- control device
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/ioctl.h>
.PP
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", unsigned long " request ", ...);"
.\" POSIX says 'request' is int, but glibc has the above
.\" See https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=42705
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR ioctl ()
system call manipulates the underlying device parameters of special files.
In particular, many operating characteristics of character special files
(e.g., terminals) may be controlled with
.BR ioctl ()
requests.
The argument
.I fd
must be an open file descriptor.
.PP
The second argument is a device-dependent request code.
The third argument is an untyped pointer to memory.
It's traditionally
.BI "char *" argp
(from the days before
.B "void *"
was valid C), and will be so named for this discussion.
.PP
An
.BR ioctl ()
.I request
has encoded in it whether the argument is an
.I in
parameter or
.I out
parameter, and the size of the argument
.I argp
in bytes.
Macros and defines used in specifying an
.BR ioctl ()
.I request
are located in the file
.IR <sys/ioctl.h> .
See NOTES.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Usually, on success zero is returned.
A few
.BR ioctl ()
requests use the return value as an output parameter
and return a nonnegative value on success.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I argp
references an inaccessible memory area.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I request
or
.I argp
is not valid.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
.I fd
is not associated with a character special device.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
The specified request does not apply to the kind of object that the
file descriptor
.I fd
references.
.SH CONFORMING TO
No single standard.
Arguments, returns, and semantics of
.BR ioctl ()
vary according to the device driver in question (the call is used as a
catch-all for operations that don't cleanly fit the UNIX stream I/O
model).
.PP
The
.BR ioctl ()
system call appeared in Version 7 AT&T UNIX.
.SH NOTES
In order to use this call, one needs an open file descriptor.
Often the
.BR open (2)
call has unwanted side effects, that can be avoided under Linux
by giving it the
.B O_NONBLOCK
flag.
.\"
.SS ioctl structure
.\" added two sections - aeb
Ioctl command values are 32-bit constants.
In principle these constants are completely arbitrary, but people have
tried to build some structure into them.
.PP
The old Linux situation was that of mostly 16-bit constants, where the
last byte is a serial number, and the preceding byte(s) give a type
indicating the driver.
Sometimes the major number was used: 0x03
for the
.B HDIO_*
ioctls, 0x06 for the
.B LP*
ioctls.
And sometimes
one or more ASCII letters were used.
For example,
.B TCGETS
has value
0x00005401, with 0x54 = \(aqT\(aq indicating the terminal driver, and
.B CYGETTIMEOUT
has value 0x00435906, with 0x43 0x59 = \(aqC\(aq \(aqY\(aq
indicating the cyclades driver.
.PP
Later (0.98p5) some more information was built into the number.
One has 2 direction bits
(00: none, 01: write, 10: read, 11: read/write)
followed by 14 size bits (giving the size of the argument),
followed by an 8-bit type (collecting the ioctls in groups
for a common purpose or a common driver), and an 8-bit
serial number.
.PP
The macros describing this structure live in
.I <asm/ioctl.h>
and are
.B _IO(type,nr)
and
.BR "{_IOR,_IOW,_IOWR}(type,nr,size)" .
They use
.I sizeof(size)
so that size is a
misnomer here: this third argument is a data type.
.PP
Note that the size bits are very unreliable: in lots of cases
they are wrong, either because of buggy macros using
.IR sizeof(sizeof(struct)) ,
or because of legacy values.
.PP
Thus, it seems that the new structure only gave disadvantages:
it does not help in checking, but it causes varying values
for the various architectures.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR execve (2),
.BR fcntl (2),
.BR ioctl_console (2),
.BR ioctl_fat (2),
.BR ioctl_ficlonerange (2),
.BR ioctl_fideduperange (2),
.BR ioctl_fslabel (2),
.BR ioctl_getfsmap (2),
.BR ioctl_iflags (2),
.BR ioctl_ns (2),
.BR ioctl_tty (2),
.BR ioctl_userfaultfd (2),
.BR open (2),
.\" .BR mt (4),
.BR sd (4),
.BR tty (4)
