.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 08:11:14 EDT 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.TH IPC 2 2021-03-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ipc \- System V IPC system calls
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <linux/ipc.h>" "        /* Definition of needed constants */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.BI "int syscall(SYS_ipc, unsigned int " call ", int " first ,
.BI "            unsigned long " second ", unsigned long " third \
", void *" ptr ,
.BI "            long " fifth );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR ipc (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR ipc ()
is a common kernel entry point for the System\ V IPC calls
for messages, semaphores, and shared memory.
.I call
determines which IPC function to invoke;
the other arguments are passed through to the appropriate call.
.PP
User-space programs should call the appropriate functions by their usual names.
Only standard library implementors and kernel hackers need to know about
.BR ipc ().
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR ipc ()
is Linux-specific, and should not be used in programs
intended to be portable.
.SH NOTES
On some architectures\(emfor example x86-64 and ARM\(emthere is no
.BR ipc ()
system call; instead,
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR shmctl (2),
and so on really are implemented as separate system calls.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR msgctl (2),
.BR msgget (2),
.BR msgrcv (2),
.BR msgsnd (2),
.BR semctl (2),
.BR semget (2),
.BR semop (2),
.BR semtimedop (2),
.BR shmat (2),
.BR shmctl (2),
.BR shmdt (2),
.BR shmget (2),
.BR sysvipc (7)
