.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" Written 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" and Copyright (C) 2007, 2015, 2020, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Thu Oct 31 15:16:23 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH LLSEEK 2 2021-03-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
_llseek \- reposition read/write file offset
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.BI "int syscall(SYS__llseek, unsigned int " fd ", unsigned long " offset_high ,
.BI "            unsigned long " offset_low ", loff_t *" result ,
.BI "            unsigned int " whence );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR _llseek (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
Note: for information about the
.BR llseek (3)
library function, see
.BR lseek64 (3).
.PP
The
.BR _llseek ()
system call repositions the offset of the open file description associated
with the file descriptor
.I fd
to the value
.IP
(offset_high << 32) | offset_low
.PP
This new offset is a byte offset
relative to the beginning of the file, the current file offset,
or the end of the file, depending on whether
.I whence
is
.BR SEEK_SET ,
.BR SEEK_CUR ,
or
.BR SEEK_END ,
respectively.
.PP
The new file offset is returned in the argument
.IR result .
The  type
.I loff_t
is a 64-bit signed type.
.PP
This system call exists on various 32-bit platforms to support
seeking to large file offsets.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Upon successful completion,
.BR _llseek ()
returns 0.
Otherwise, a value of \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not an open file descriptor.
.TP
.B EFAULT
Problem with copying results to user space.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I whence
is invalid.
.SH CONFORMING TO
This function is Linux-specific, and should not be used in programs
intended to be portable.
.SH NOTES
You probably want to use the
.BR lseek (2)
wrapper function instead.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lseek (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR lseek64 (3)
