.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Bert Hubert <ahu@ds9a.nl>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Created Sun Jun 3 17:23:32 2001 by bert hubert <ahu@ds9a.nl>
.\" Slightly adapted, following comments by Hugh Dickins, aeb, 2001-06-04.
.\" Modified, 20 May 2003, Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\" Modified, 30 Apr 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.TH MINCORE 2 2004-04-30 "Linux 2.6.5" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
mincore \- get information on whether pages are in core
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
.BI "int mincore(void *" start ", size_t " length ", unsigned char *" vec );
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mincore
function requests a vector describing which pages of a file are in core and
can be read without disk access. The kernel will supply data for
.I length
bytes following the 
.I start
address. On return, the kernel will have filled
.I vec
with bytes, of which the least significant bit indicates if a page is 
core resident. (The other bits are undefined, reserved for possible
later use.)
Of course this is only a snapshot - pages that are not
locked in core can come and go any moment, and the contents of
.I vec
may be stale already when this call returns.

For
.B mincore
to return successfully, 
.I start
must lie on a page boundary. It is the caller's responsibility to
round up to the nearest page. The
.I length
parameter need not be a multiple of the page size. The vector
.I vec
must be large enough to contain (length+PAGE_SIZE-1) / PAGE_SIZE bytes.
One may obtain the page size from
.BR getpagesize (2).

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.B mincore
returns zero.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.B EAGAIN
kernel is temporarily out of resources
.TP
.B EFAULT
.I vec
points to an invalid address
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I start
is not a multiple of the page size, or
.I len
has a non-positive value
.TP
.B ENOMEM
.I address
to
.I address
+
.I length
contained unmapped memory, or memory not part of a file.

.SH BUGS
Up to now (Linux 2.6.5),
.B mincore
does not return correct information for MAP_PRIVATE mappings.

.\" Linux (up to now, 2.6.5),
.\" .B mincore
.\" does not return correct information for MAP_PRIVATE mappings:
.\" for a MAP_PRIVATE file mapping,
.\" .B mincore
.\" returns the residency of the file pages, rather than any
.\" modified process-private pages that have been copied on write;
.\" for a MAP_PRIVATE mapping of
.\" .IR /dev/zero ,
.\" .B mincore
.\" always reports pages as non-resident;
.\" and for a MAP_PRIVATE, MAP_ANONYMOUS mapping,
.\" .B mincore
.\" always fails with the error
.\" .BR ENOMEM .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
.B mincore
does not appear to be part of POSIX or the Single Unix Specification. 
.SH HISTORY
The mincore() function first appeared in 4.4BSD.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Since Linux 2.3.99pre1 and glibc 2.2.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getpagesize (2),
.BR mlock (2),
.BR mmap (2)
