.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright 1995 Michael Chastain (mec@shell.portal.com), 15 April 1995.
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified 22 July 1995 by Michael Chastain (mec@duracef.shout.net):
.\"   Fixed incorrect word in 'TH' call.
.\"
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 16:44:55 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\"
.TH OBSOLETE 2 1995-07-22 "Linux 2.0" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
oldfstat, oldlstat, oldstat, oldolduname, olduname \- obsolete system calls
.SH SYNOPSIS
Obsolete system calls.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Linux 2.0 kernel implements these calls to support old executables.
These calls return structures which have grown since their
first implementation,
but old executables must continue to receive old smaller structures.
.PP
Current executables should be linked with current libraries and never
use these calls.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
These calls are unique to Linux and should not be used at all in new programs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fstat (2),
.BR lstat (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR uname (2),
.BR unimplemented (2)
