.\" Contributed by Niki A. Rahimi, LTC Security Development
.\" narahimi@us.ibm.com
.\" May be freely distributed.
.\"
.TH PCICONFIG_READ 2 2003-07-14 "Linux 2.4.19" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pciconfig_read, pciconfig_write, pciconfig_iobase \- pci device information handling
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pci.h>
.sp
.BI "int pciconfig_read(unsigned long " bus ", unsigned long " dfn , 
.BI "     unsigned long " off ", unsigned long " len ", void *" buf );
.BI "int pciconfig_write(unsigned long " bus ", unsigned long " dfn , 
.BI "     unsigned long " off ", unsigned long " len ", void *" buf );
.BI "int pciconfig_iobase(long " which ", unsigned long " bus ,
.BI "     unsigned long " devfn ); 
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.TP
Most of the interaction with PCI devices is already handled by the kernel PCI layer, and thus these calls should not normally need to be accessed from userspace. 
.TP
.BR pciconfig_read 
Reads to
.I
buf
from device
.I
dev
at offset 
.I
off
value.
.TP
.BR pciconfig_write 
Writes from
.I
buf
to device
.I
dev
at offset 
.I
off
value.
.TP
.BR pciconfig_iobase 
You pass it a bus/devfn pair and get a physical address for either the memory offset (for things like prep, this is 0xc0000000), the IO base for PIO cycles, or the ISA holes if any.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.TP
.BR pciconfig_read 
On success zero is returned. On error, -1 is returned and errno is set appropriately.
.TP
.BR pciconfig_write 
On success zero is returned. On error, -1 is returned and errno is set appropriately.
.TP
.BR pciconfig_iobase 
Returns information on locations of various I/O regions in physical memory according to the 
.I which 
value. Values for 
.I which
are: IOBASE_BRIDGE_NUMBER, IOBASE_MEMORY, IOBASE_IO, IOBASE_ISA_IO, IOBASE_ISA_MEM.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I len
value is invalid. This does not apply to pci_iobase.
.TP
.B EIO
I/O error.
.TP
.B ENODEV
For pci_iobase, hose value is NULL? For the other calls, could not find a slot.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
The system has not implemented these calls (CONFIG_PCI not defined).
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
This return value is only valid for pci_iobase. It is returned if the value for
.I
which
is invalid.
.TP
.B EPERM
User does not have the CAP_SYS_ADMIN capability. This does not apply to pci_iobase.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
These calls are Linux specific, available since Linux 2.0.26/2.1.11.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR capabilities (7)
