.\" Copyright (C) 1995, Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Created   Sat Aug 21 1995     Thomas K. Dyas <tdyas@eden.rutgers.edu>
.\"
.\" typo corrected, aeb, 950825
.\" added layout change from joey, 960722
.\" changed prototype, documented 0xffffffff, aeb, 030101
.\" Modified 2004-11-03 patch from Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.org>
.\"
.TH PERSONALITY 2 2015-12-28 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
personality \- set the process execution domain
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/personality.h>
.sp
.BI "int personality(unsigned long " persona );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Linux supports different execution domains, or personalities, for each
process.
Among other things, execution domains tell Linux how to map
signal numbers into signal actions.
The execution domain system allows
Linux to provide limited support for binaries compiled under other
UNIX-like operating systems.

If
.I persona
is not
0xffffffff, then
.BR personality ()
sets the caller's execution domain to the value specified by
.IR persona .
Specifying
.IR persona
as 0xffffffff provides a way of retrieving
the current persona without changing it.

A list of the available execution domains can be found in
.IR <sys/personality.h> .
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, the previous
.I persona
is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
The kernel was unable to change the personality.
.SH VERSIONS
This system call first appeared in Linux 1.1.20;
library support was added in glibc 2.3.
.\" personality wrapper first appeared in glibc 1.90,
.\" <sys/personality.h> was added later in 2.2.91.
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR personality ()
is Linux-specific and should not be used in programs intended to
be portable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR setarch (8)
