.\" Copyright (C) 2016 Intel Corporation
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and author of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH PKEY_ALLOC 2 2016-03-03 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pkey_alloc, pkey_free \- allocate or free a protection key
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/mman.h>
.sp
.BI "int pkey_alloc(unsigned long " flags ", unsigned long " access_rights ");"
.BI "int pkey_free(int " pkey ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR pkey_alloc ()
allocates a protection key (pkey) and allows it to be passed to
.BR pkey_mprotect (2).

The
.BR pkey_alloc ()
.I flags
argument may contain zero or more disable operations:
.TP
.B PKEY_DISABLE_ACCESS
Disable all data access to memory covered by the returned protection key.
.TP
.B PKEY_DISABLE_WRITE
Disable write access to memory covered by the returned protection key.
.PP
.BR pkey_free ()
frees a protection key and makes it available for later
allocations.
After a protection key has been freed, it may no longer be used
in any protection-key-related operations.

An application should not call
.BR pkey_free ()
on any protection key which has been assigned to an address
range by
.BR pkey_mprotect (2)
and which is still in use.
The behavior in this case is undefined and may result in an error.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR pkey_alloc ()
returns a positive protection key value.
.BR pkey_free ()
returns zero.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
.IR pkey ,
.IR flags ,
or
.I access_rights
is invalid.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
.RB ( pkey_alloc ())
All protection keys available for the current process have
been allocated.
The number of keys available is architecture-specific and
implementation-specific and may be reduced by kernel-internal use
of certain keys.
There are currently 15 keys available to user programs on x86.

This error will also be returned if the processor or operating system
does not support protection keys.
Applications should always be prepared to handle this error, since
factors outside of the application's control can reduce the number
of available pkeys.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR pkey_alloc ()
and
.BR pkey_free ()
were added to Linux in kernel 4.9.
Glibc support is not yet available.
.SH CONFORMING TO
The
.BR pkey_alloc ()
and
.BR pkey_free ()
system calls are Linux-specific.
.SH NOTES
.BR pkey_alloc ()
is always safe to call regardless of whether or not the operating system
supports protection keys.
It can be used in lieu of any other mechanism for detecting pkey support
and will simply fail with the error
.B ENOSPC 
if the operating system has no pkey support.

The kernel guarantees that the contents of the hardware rights
register (PKRU) will be preserved only for allocated protection
keys.
Any time a key is unallocated (either before the first call
returning that key from
.BR pkey_alloc ()
or after it is freed via
.BR pkey_free ()),
the kernel may make arbitrary changes to the parts of the
rights register affecting access to that key.
.SH EXAMPLE
See
.BR pkeys (7).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pkey_mprotect (2),
.BR pkeys (7)
