.\" Copyright (C) 1999 Joseph Samuel Myers.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH PREAD 2 2010-09-26 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pread, pwrite \- read from or write to a file descriptor at a given offset
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "ssize_t pread(int " fd ", void *" buf ", size_t " count \
", off_t " offset );
.sp
.BI "ssize_t pwrite(int " fd ", const void *" buf ", size_t " count \
", off_t " offset );
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.PD 0
.ad l
.sp
.BR pread (),
.BR pwrite ():
.RS 4
_XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 500
.br
|| /* Since glibc 2.12: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L
.RE
.ad
.PD
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR pread ()
reads up to
.I count
bytes from file descriptor
.I fd
at offset
.I offset
(from the start of the file) into the buffer starting at
.IR buf .
The file offset is not changed.
.PP
.BR pwrite ()
writes up to
.I count
bytes from the buffer starting at
.I buf
to the file descriptor
.I fd
at offset
.IR offset .
The file offset is not changed.
.PP
The file referenced by
.I fd
must be capable of seeking.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, the number of bytes read or written is returned (zero
indicates that nothing was written, in the case of
.BR pwrite (),
or
end of file, in the case of
.BR pread ()),
or \-1 on error, in which case
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.BR pread ()
can fail and set
.I errno
to any error specified for
.BR read (2)
or
.BR lseek (2).
.BR pwrite ()
can fail and set
.I errno
to any error specified for
.BR write (2)
or
.BR lseek (2).
.SH VERSIONS
The
.BR pread ()
and
.BR pwrite ()
system calls were added to Linux in
version 2.1.60; the entries in the i386 system call table were added
in 2.1.69.
C library support (including emulation using
.BR lseek (2)
on older kernels without the system calls) was added in glibc 2.1.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lseek (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR write (2)
