.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" This manpage is Copyright (C) 2004, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2004-05-40 Created by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\" 2004-10-05 aeb, minor correction
.\"
.TH READAHEAD 2 2004-10-05 "Linux 2.6.5" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
readahead \- perform file readahead into page cache
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <fcntl.h>
.sp
.BI "ssize_t readahead(int " fd ", off64_t *" offset ", size_t " count );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B readahead()
populates the page cache with data from a file so that subsequent
reads from that file will not block on disk I/O.
The
.I fd
argument is a file descriptor identifying the file which is
to be read.
The
.I offset
argument specifies the starting point from which data is to be read
and
.I count
specifies the number of bytes to be read.
I/O is performed in whole pages, so that 
.I offset
is effectively rounded down to a page boundary
and bytes are read up to the next page boundary greater than or
equal to
.IR "(offset+count)" .
.B readahead()
does not read beyond the end of the file.
.B readahead()
blocks until the specified data has been read.
The current file offset of the open file referred to by
.I fd
is left unchanged.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, 
.B readahead()
returns 0; on failure, \-1 is returned, with
.I errno
set to indicate the cause of the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor or is not open for reading.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I fd
does not refer to a file type to which
.B readahead
can be applied.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The 
.B readahead()
system call is Linux specific, and its use should be avoided
in portable applications.
.SH NOTES
The
.B readahead()
system call appeared in Linux 2.4.13.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fadvise (2),
.BR lseek (2),
.BR madvise (2),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR read (2)
