.\" Copyright IBM Corp. 2017
.\" Author: QingFeng Hao <haoqf@linux.vnet.ibm.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH S390_STHYI 2 2021-03-22 "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
s390_sthyi \- emulate STHYI instruction
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <asm/sthyi.h>" "        /* Definition of " STHYI_* " constants */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.BI "int syscall(SYS_s390_sthyi, unsigned long " function_code ,
.BI "            void *" resp_buffer ", uint64_t *" return_code ,
.BI "            unsigned long " flags );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR s390_sthyi (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR s390_sthyi ()
system call emulates the STHYI (Store Hypervisor Information) instruction.
It provides hardware resource information for the machine and its
virtualization levels.
This includes CPU type and capacity, as well as the machine model and
other metrics.
.PP
The
.I function_code
argument indicates which function to perform.
The following code(s) are supported:
.TP
.B STHYI_FC_CP_IFL_CAP
Return CP (Central Processor) and IFL (Integrated Facility for Linux)
capacity information.
.PP
The
.I resp_buffer
argument specifies the address of a response buffer.
When the
.I function_code
is
.BR STHYI_FC_CP_IFL_CAP ,
the buffer must be one page (4K) in size.
If the system call returns 0,
the response buffer will be filled with CPU capacity information.
Otherwise, the response buffer's content is unchanged.
.PP
The
.I return_code
argument stores the return code of the STHYI instruction,
using one of the following values:
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
4
Unsupported function code.
.PP
For further details about
.IR return_code ,
.IR function_code ,
and
.IR resp_buffer ,
see the reference given in NOTES.
.PP
The
.I flags
argument is provided to allow for future extensions and currently
must be set to 0.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success (that is: emulation succeeded), the return value of
.BR s390_sthyi ()
matches the condition code of the STHYI instructions, which is a value
in the range [0..3].
A return value of 0 indicates that CPU capacity information is stored in
.IR *resp_buffer .
A return value of 3 indicates "unsupported function code" and the content of
.IR *resp_buffer
is unchanged.
The return values 1 and 2 are reserved.
.PP
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.IR errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EFAULT
The value specified in
.I resp_buffer
or
.I return_code
is not a valid address.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The value specified in
.I flags
is nonzero.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Allocating memory for handling the CPU capacity information failed.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
The value specified in
.I function_code
is not valid.
.SH VERSIONS
This system call is available since Linux 4.15.
.SH CONFORMING TO
This Linux-specific system call is available only on the s390 architecture.
.SH NOTES
For details of the STHYI instruction, see
.UR https://www.ibm.com\:/support\:/knowledgecenter\:/SSB27U_6.3.0\:/com.ibm.zvm.v630.hcpb4\:/hcpb4sth.htm
the documentation page
.UE .
.PP
When the system call interface is used, the response buffer doesn't
have to fulfill alignment requirements described in the STHYI
instruction definition.
.PP
The kernel caches the response (for up to one second, as of Linux 4.16).
Subsequent system call invocations may return the cached response.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR syscall (2)
