.\" Copyright (c) IBM Corp. 2012
.\" Author: Jan Glauber <jang@linux.vnet.ibm.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH S390_RUNTIME_INSTR 2 2021-03-22 "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
s390_runtime_instr \- enable/disable s390 CPU run-time instrumentation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <asm/runtime_instr.h>" " /* Definition of " S390_* " constants */"
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "       /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.BI "int syscall(SYS_s390_runtime_instr, int " command ", int " signum );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrapper for
.BR s390_runtime_instr (),
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR s390_runtime_instr ()
system call starts or stops CPU run-time instrumentation for the
calling thread.
.PP
The
.IR command
argument controls whether run-time instrumentation is started
.RB ( S390_RUNTIME_INSTR_START ,
1) or stopped
.RB ( S390_RUNTIME_INSTR_STOP ,
2) for the calling thread.
.PP
The
.IR signum
argument specifies the number of a real-time signal.
This argument was used to specify a signal number that should be delivered
to the thread if the run-time instrumentation buffer was full or if
the run-time-instrumentation-halted interrupt had occurred.
This feature was never used,
and in Linux 4.4 support for this feature was removed;
.\" commit b38feccd663b55ab07116208b68e1ffc7c3c7e78
thus, in current kernels, this argument is ignored.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR s390_runtime_instr ()
returns 0 and enables the thread for
run-time instrumentation by assigning the thread a default run-time
instrumentation control block.
The caller can then read and modify the control block and start the run-time
instrumentation.
On error, \-1 is returned and
.IR errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
The value specified in
.IR command
is not a valid command.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The value specified in
.IR signum
is not a real-time signal number.
From Linux 4.4 onwards, the
.IR signum
argument has no effect,
so that an invalid signal number will not result in an error.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Allocating memory for the run-time instrumentation control block failed.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
The run-time instrumentation facility is not available.
.SH VERSIONS
This system call is available since Linux 3.7.
.SH CONFORMING TO
This Linux-specific system call is available only on the s390 architecture.
The run-time instrumentation facility is available
beginning with System z EC12.
.SH NOTES
The
.I asm/runtime_instr.h
header file is available
.\" commit df2f815a7df7edb5335a3bdeee6a8f9f6f9c35c4
since Linux 4.16.
.PP
Starting with Linux 4.4,
support for signalling was removed, as was the check whether
.IR signum
is a valid real-time signal.
For backwards compatibility with older kernels, it is recommended to pass
a valid real-time signal number in
.I signum
and install a handler for that signal.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR syscall (2),
.BR signal (7)
