.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) Tom Bjorkholm & Markus Kuhn, 1996
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" 1996-04-01 Tom Bjorkholm <tomb@mydata.se>
.\"            First version written
.\" 1996-04-10 Markus Kuhn <mskuhn@cip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de>
.\"            revision
.\"
.TH SCHED_YIELD 2 1996-04-10 "Linux 1.3.81" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sched_yield \- yield the processor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sched.h>
.sp
\fBint sched_yield(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
A process can relinquish the processor voluntarily without blocking by calling 
.BR sched_yield .
The process will then be moved to the end of the queue for its static
priority and a new process gets to run.

Note: If the current process is the only process in the highest
priority list at that time, this process will continue to run after a
call to
.BR sched_yield .

POSIX systems on which
.B sched_yield
is available define
.I _POSIX_PRIORITY_SCHEDULING
in <unistd.h>.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success,
.B sched_yield
returns 0.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.

.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX.1b (formerly POSIX.4)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sched_setscheduler (2)
for a description of Linux scheduling.
.PP
.I Programming for the real world \- POSIX.4
by Bill O. Gallmeister, O'Reilly & Associates, Inc., ISBN 1-56592-074-0
.br
.I IEEE Std 1003.1b-1993
(POSIX.1b standard)
.br
.I ISO/IEC 9945-1:1996
