.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" [should really be seteuid.3]
.\" Modified, 27 May 2004, Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"     Added notes on capability requirements
.\"
.TH SETEGID 2 2004-05-27 "Linux 2.6.6" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
seteuid, setegid \- set effective user or group ID
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int seteuid(uid_t " euid );
.br
.BI "int setegid(gid_t " egid );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B seteuid
sets the effective user ID of the current process.
Unprivileged user processes may only set the effective user ID to the
real user ID, the effective user ID or the saved user ID.

Precisely the same holds for
.B setegid
with "group" instead of "user".

.\" When
.\" .I euid
.\" equals \-1, nothing is changed.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.\" .TP
.\" .B EINVAL
.TP
.B EPERM
The current process is not privileged (Linux: does not have the
.B CAP_SETUID
capability in the case of
.BR seteuid (),
or the
.B CAP_SETGID
capability in the case of
.BR setegid ())
and
.I euid
(resp.
.IR egid )
is not the real user (group) ID, the effective user (group) ID
or the saved user (group) ID.
.SH NOTES
Setting the effective user (group) ID to the saved user (group) ID is
possible since Linux 1.1.37 (1.1.38).
On an arbitrary system one should check _POSIX_SAVED_IDS.
.LP
Under libc4, libc5 and glibc2.0
.BI seteuid( euid )
is equivalent to 
.BI setreuid(-1, " euid" )
and hence may change the saved user ID.
Under glibc2.1 it is equivalent to
.BI setresuid(-1, " euid" ,-1)
and hence does not change the saved user ID.
Similar remarks hold for
.BR setegid .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
BSD 4.3
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR geteuid (2),
.BR setresuid (2),
.BR setreuid (2),
.BR setuid (2),
.BR capabilities (7)
