.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:14:13 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 15 April 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>
.\"   Update calling parameters to Linux 1.2.4 values.
.\" Modified 10 June 1995 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>
.\" Modified 3 May 1996 by Martin Schulze <joey@infodrom.north.de>
.\" Modified Wed Nov  6 04:05:28 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Sat Jan 29 01:08:23 2000 by aeb
.\"
.TH SETUP 2 1996-05-03 "Linux 1.2.9" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
setup \- setup devices and file systems, mount root file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.B _syscall0(int, setup);
.sp
.B int setup(void);
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B setup
is called once from within
.IR linux/init/main.c .
It calls initialization functions for devices and file systems
configured into the kernel and then mounts the root file system.
.PP
No user process may call
.BR setup .
Any user process, even a process with super-user permission,
will receive
.BR EPERM .
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.B setup
always returns \-1 for a user process.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EPERM
Always, for a user process.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This function is Linux specific, and should not be used in programs
intended to be portable, or indeed in any programs at all.
Since Linux 2.1.121, no such function exists anymore.
The calling sequence varied: it has had a single parameter
.I "void * BIOS"
and at other times a single parameter
.IR "int magic" .
