.\"
.\" Extended attributes system calls manual pages
.\"
.\" (C) Andreas Gruenbacher, February 2001
.\" (C) Silicon Graphics Inc, September 2001
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.TH SETXATTR 2 "Extended Attributes" "Dec 2001" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
setxattr, lsetxattr, fsetxattr \- set an extended attribute value
.SH SYNOPSIS
.fam C
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <attr/xattr.h>
.sp
.BI "int setxattr (const char\ *" path ", const char\ *" name ",
.BI "\t\t\t const void\ *" value ", size_t " size ", int " flags );
.BI "int lsetxattr (const char\ *" path ", const char\ *" name ",
.BI "\t\t\t const void\ *" value ", size_t " size ", int " flags );
.BI "int fsetxattr (int " filedes ", const char\ *" name ",
.BI "\t\t\t const void\ *" value ", size_t " size ", int " flags );
.fi
.fam T
.SH DESCRIPTION
Extended attributes are
.IR name :\c
.I value
pairs associated with inodes (files, directories, symlinks, etc).
They are extensions to the normal attributes which are associated
with all inodes in the system (i.e. the
.BR stat (2)
data).
A complete overview of extended attributes concepts can be found in
.BR attr (5).
.PP
.B setxattr
sets the
.I value
of the extended attribute identified by
.I name
and associated with the given
.I path
in the filesystem.
The
.I size
of the
.I value
must be specified.
.PP
.B lsetxattr
is identical to 
.BR setxattr ,
except in the case of a symbolic link, where the extended attribute is
set on the link itself, not the file that it refers to.
.PP
.B fsetxattr
is identical to
.BR setxattr ,
only the extended attribute is set on the open file pointed to by
.I filedes
(as returned by
.BR open (2))
in place of
.IR path .
.PP
An extended attribute name is a simple NULL-terminated string.
The
.I name
includes a namespace prefix \- there may be several, disjoint
namespaces associated with an individual inode.
The
.I value
of an extended attribute is a chunk of arbitrary textual or
binary data of specified length.
.PP
The
.I flags
parameter can be used to refine the semantics of the operation.
XATTR_CREATE specifies a pure create, which fails if the named
attribute exists already.
XATTR_REPLACE specifies a pure replace operation, which fails if the
named attribute does not already exist.
By default (no flags), the extended attribute will be created if
need be, or will simply replace the value if the attribute exists.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, zero is returned.
On failure, \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.PP
If XATTR_CREATE is specified, and the attribute exists already,
.I errno
is set to EEXIST.
If XATTR_REPLACE is specified, and the attribute does not exist,
.I errno
is set to ENOATTR.
.PP
If there is insufficient space remaining to store the extended attribute,
.I errno
is set to either ENOSPC, or EDQUOT if quota enforcement was the cause.
.PP
If extended attributes are not supported by the filesystem, or are disabled,
.I errno
is set to ENOTSUP.
.PP
The errors documented for the
.BR stat (2)
system call are also applicable here.
.SH AUTHORS
Andreas Gruenbacher,
.RI < a.gruenbacher@computer.org >
and the SGI XFS development team,
.RI < linux-xfs@oss.sgi.com >.
Please send any bug reports or comments to these addresses.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR getfattr (1),
.BR setfattr (1),
.BR getxattr (2),
.BR listxattr (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR removexattr (2),
.BR stat (2),
.BR attr (5)
