.\" Copyright (c) 2007 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH SGETMASK 2  2021-03-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sgetmask, ssetmask \- manipulation of signal mask (obsolete)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#include <sys/syscall.h>" "      /* Definition of " SYS_* " constants */"
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.B "long syscall(SYS_sgetmask, void);"
.BI "long syscall(SYS_ssetmask, long " newmask );
.fi
.PP
.IR Note :
glibc provides no wrappers for these functions,
necessitating the use of
.BR syscall (2).
.SH DESCRIPTION
These system calls are obsolete.
.IR "Do not use them" ;
use
.BR sigprocmask (2)
instead.
.PP
.BR sgetmask ()
returns the signal mask of the calling process.
.PP
.BR ssetmask ()
sets the signal mask of the calling process to the value given in
.IR newmask .
The previous signal mask is returned.
.PP
The signal masks dealt with by these two system calls
are plain bit masks (unlike the
.I sigset_t
used by
.BR sigprocmask (2));
use
.BR sigmask (3)
to create and inspect these masks.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR sgetmask ()
always successfully returns the signal mask.
.BR ssetmask ()
always succeeds, and returns the previous signal mask.
.SH ERRORS
These system calls always succeed.
.SH VERSIONS
Since Linux 3.16,
.\" f6187769dae48234f3877df3c4d99294cc2254fa
support for these system calls is optional,
depending on whether the kernel was built with the
.B CONFIG_SGETMASK_SYSCALL
option.
.SH CONFORMING TO
These system calls are Linux-specific.
.SH NOTES
These system calls are unaware of signal numbers greater than 31
(i.e., real-time signals).
.PP
These system calls do not exist on x86-64.
.PP
It is not possible to block
.B SIGSTOP
or
.BR SIGKILL .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
