.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)sigblock.2	6.7 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 10:09:15 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Fri Aug 11 1995 by Stephen Lee <sl14@cornell.edu>
.\" Modified 1995 by Mike Battersby <mib@deakin.edu.au>
.\""
.TH SIGBLOCK 2 1995-08-31 "Linux 1.3" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sigblock, siggetmask, sigsetmask, sigmask \- manipulate the signal mask
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigblock(int " mask );
.sp
.B int siggetmask(void);
.sp
.BI "int sigsetmask(int " mask );
.sp
.BI "int sigmask(int " signum );
.SH DESCRIPTION
This interface is made obsolete by
.BR sigprocmask (2).

The 
.B sigblock
system call adds the signals specified in
.I mask
to the set of signals currently being blocked from delivery.
.PP
The 
.B sigsetmask
system call replaces the set of blocked signals totally with a new set
specified in
.IR mask .
Signals are blocked if the corresponding bit in
.I mask
is a 1.
.PP
The current set of blocked signals can be obtained using
.BR siggetmask .
.PP
The 
.B sigmask
macro is provided to construct the mask for a given
.IR signum .

.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.B siggetmask
returns the current set of masked signals.

.B sigsetmask 
and
.B sigblock
return the previous set of masked signals.
.SH NOTES
Prototypes for these functions are only available if
.B _BSD_SOURCE
is defined before the inclusion of any system header file.
.PP
It is not possible to block
.B SIGKILL
or
.B SIGSTOP
\- this restriction is silently imposed by the system.

.SH "CONFORMING TO"
4.4BSD. These function calls appeared in BSD 4.3 and are deprecated.
Use the POSIX signal facilities for new programs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigprocmask (2),
.BR signal (7)
