.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" added note on self-signalling, aeb, 2002-06-07
.\" added note on CAP_KILL, mtk, 2004-06-16
.\"
.TH SIGQUEUE 2 2004-06-16 "Linux 2.6.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sigqueue \- queue a signal and data to a process
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <signal.h>
.sp
.BI "int sigqueue(pid_t " pid ", int " sig ", const union sigval " value ");
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR sigqueue ()
sends the signal specified in
.I sig
to the process whose PID is given in
.IR pid .
The permissions required to send a signal are the same as for
.BR kill (2).
As with 
.BR kill (2),
the null signal (0) can be used to check if a process with a given
PID exists.
.PP
The
.I value
argument is used to specify an accompanying item of data (either an integer
or a pointer value) to be sent with the signal, and has the following type:
.sp
.in +2n
.nf
union sigval {
    int   sival_int;
    void *sival_ptr;
};
.fi
.in -2n

If the receiving process has installed a handler for this signal using the
.B SA_SIGINFO
flag to
.BR sigaction (2),
then it can obtain this data via the
.I si_value
field of the 
.I siginfo_t
structure passed as the second argument to the handler.
Furthermore, the
.I si_code
field of that structure will be set to
.BR SI_QUEUE .
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, 
.BR sigqueue ()
returns 0, indicating that the signal was successfully
queued to the receiving proces.
Otherwise \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EAGAIN
The limit of signals which may be queued has been reached.
(See
.BR signal (7)
for further information.)
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I sig
was invalid.
.TP
.B EPERM
The process does not have permission to send the signal
to the receiving process.
For the required permissions, see
.BR kill (2).
.TP
.B ESRCH
No process has a PID matching
.IR pid .
.SH NOTES
If this function results in the sending of a signal to the process
that invoked it, and that signal was not blocked by the calling thread,
and no other threads were willing to handle this signal (either by
having it unblocked, or by waiting for it using
.BR sigwait (3)),
then at least some signal must be delivered to this thread before this
function returns.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX 1003.1-2001
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR kill (2),
.BR sigaction (2),
.BR signal (2),
.BR sigwait (3),
.BR signal (7)
