'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"     $Id: socket.2,v 1.4 1999/05/13 11:33:42 freitag Exp $
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 1998, 1999 by Andi Kleen <ak@muc.de>
.\" Modified 2002-07-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.TH SOCKET 2 2017-09-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
socket \- create an endpoint for communication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR "#include <sys/types.h>" "          /* See NOTES */"
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.PP
.BI "int socket(int " domain ", int " type ", int " protocol );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR socket ()
creates an endpoint for communication and returns a file descriptor
that refers to that endpoint.
The file descriptor returned by a successful call will be
the lowest-numbered file descriptor not currently open for the process.
.PP
The
.I domain
argument specifies a communication domain; this selects the protocol
family which will be used for communication.
These families are defined in
.IR <sys/socket.h> .
The currently understood formats include:
.TS
tab(:);
l1 lw38 l.
Name:Purpose:Man page
T{
.BR AF_UNIX
T}:T{
Local communication
T}:T{
.BR unix (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_LOCAL
T}:T{
Synonym for
.B AF_UNIX
T}:T{
T}
T{
.B AF_INET
T}:IPv4 Internet protocols:T{
.BR ip (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_AX25
T}:T{
Amateur radio AX.25 protocol
T}:T{
.\" Part of ax25-tools
.BR ax25 (4)
T}
T{
.B AF_IPX
T}:IPX \- Novell protocols:
T{
.B AF_APPLETALK
T}:AppleTalk:T{
.BR ddp (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_NETROM
T}:T{
AX.25 packet layer protocol
T}:T{
.\" Part of ax25-tools package
.BR netrom (4),
T}
T{
.B AF_BRIDGE
T}:T{
Can't be used for creating sockets;
mostly used for bridge links in
.BR rtnetlink (7)
protocol commands
T}
T{
.B AF_ATMPVC
T}:T{
Access to raw ATM Permanent Virtual Circuits (PVCs)
T}
T{
.B AF_X25
T}:ITU-T X.25 / ISO-8208 protocol:T{
.BR x25 (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_INET6
T}:IPv6 Internet protocols:T{
.BR ipv6 (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_ROSE
T}:T{
RATS (Radio Amateur Telecommunications Society)
Open Systems environment (ROSE) AX.25 packet layer protocol
T}
T{
.B AF_DECnet
T}:T{
DECet protocol sockets
T}
T{
.B AF_NETBEUI
T}:T{
Reserved for "802.2LLC project"; never used
T}
T{
.B AF_SECURITY
T}:T{
Was a short-lived (between Linux 2.1.30 and 2.1.99pre2) protocol family
for firewall upcalls
T}
T{
.B AF_KEY
T}:T{
Key management protocol, originally developed for usage with IPsec;
no relation to
.BR keyctl (2)
and related in-kernel key storage facility
(since Linux 2.1.38.)
T}
T{
.B AF_NETLINK
T}:T{
Kernel user interface device
T}:T{
.BR netlink (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_PACKET
T}:T{
Low-level packet interface
T}:T{
.BR packet (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_ECONET
T}:T{
.\" commit: 349f29d841dbae854bd7367be7c250401f974f47
Acorn Econet protocol (removed in Linux 3.5)
T}
T{
.B AF_ATMSVC
T}:T{
Access to ATM Switched Virtual Circuits (SVCs)
T}
T{
.B AF_RDS
T}:T{
.\" commit: 639b321b4d8f4e412bfbb2a4a19bfebc1e68ace4
Reliable Datagram Sockets (RDS) protocol (since Linux 2.6.30);
RDS over RDMA has no relation to
.B AF_SMC
and/or
.BR AF_XDP
T}:T{
.\" rds-tools: https://github.com/oracle/rds-tools/blob/master/rds.7
.\" rds-tools: https://github.com/oracle/rds-tools/blob/master/rds-rdma.7
.BR rds (7)
.br
.BR rds-rdma (7),
T}
T{
.B AF_IRDA
T}:T{
.\" commits: 1ca163afb6fd569b, d64c2a76123f0300
Socket interface over IrDA
(moved to staging in Linux 4.14, removed in Linux 4.17)
T}:T{
.\" irda-utils: https://sourceforge.net/p/irda/code/HEAD/tree/tags/IRDAUTILS_0_9_18/irda-utils/man/irda.7.gz?format=raw
.BR irda (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_PPPOX
T}:T{
Generic PPP transport layer, for setting up up L2 tunnels
(L2TP and PPPoE)
T}
T{
.B AF_WANPIPE
T}:T{
.\" commits: ce0ecd594d78710422599918a608e96dd1ee6024
Legacy protocol for wide area network (WAN) connectivity
that was used by Sangoma WAN cards (called "WANPIPE");
removed in Linux 2.6.21
T}
T{
.B AF_LLC
T}:T{
.\" linux-history commit: 34beb106cde7da233d4df35dd3d6cf4fee937caa
Logical link control (IEEE 802.2 LLC) protocol, upper part
of data link layer of ISO/OSI networking protocol stack
(since Linux 2.4);
has no relation to
.BR AF_PACKET
T}
T{
.B AF_IB
T}:T{
.\" commits: 8d36eb01da5d371f..ce117ffac2e93334
InfiniBand native addressing (since Linux 3.11)
T}
T{
.B AF_MPLS
T}:T{
.\" commits: 0189197f441602acdca3f97750d392a895b778fd
Multiprotocol Label Switching (since Linux 4.1);
mostly used for configuring MPLS routing via
.BR netlink (7),
as it doesn't expose ability to create sockets to user space
T}
T{
.B AF_CAN
T}:T{
.\" commits: 8dbde28d9711475a..5423dd67bd0108a1
Controller Area Network automotive bus protocol (since Linux 2.6.25)
T}
T{
.B AF_TIPC
T}:T{
.\" commits: b97bf3fd8f6a16966d4f18983b2c40993ff937d4
TIPC, "cluster domain sockets" protocol (since Linux 2.6.16)
T}
T{
.B AF_BLUETOOTH
T}:T{
.\" commits: 8d36eb01da5d371f..ce117ffac2e93334
Bluetooth low-level socket protocol (since Linux 3.11)
T}
T{
.B AF_IUCV
T}:T{
.\" commit: eac3731bd04c7131478722a3c148b78774553116
IUCV (inter-user communication vehicle) z/VM protocol
for hypervisor-guest interaction (since Linux 2.6.21);
has no relation to
.B AF_VSOCK
and/or
.BR AF_SMC
T}
T{
.B AF_RXRPC
T}:T{
.\" commit: 17926a79320afa9b95df6b977b40cca6d8713cea
.\" http://people.redhat.com/~dhowells/rxrpc/
.\" https://www.infradead.org/~dhowells/kafs/af_rxrpc_client.html
.\" http://workshop.openafs.org/afsbpw09/talks/thu_2/kafs.pdf
.\" http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/dist-afs.pdf
.\" http://web.mit.edu/kolya/afs/rx/rx-spec
Rx, Andrew File System remote procedure call protocol
(since Linux 2.6.22)
T}
T{
.B AF_ISDN
T}:T{
.\" commit: 1b2b03f8e514e4f68e293846ba511a948b80243c
New "modular ISDN" driver interface protocol (since Linux 2.6.27)
T}
T{
.B AF_PHONET
T}:T{
.\" commit: 4b07b3f69a8471cdc142c51461a331226fef248a
Nokia cellular modem IPC/RPC interface (since Linux 2.6.31)
T}
T{
.B AF_IEEE802154
T}:T{
.\" commit: 9ec7671603573ede31207eb5b0b3e1aa211b2854
IEEE 802.15.4 WPAN (wireless personal area network) raw packet protocol
(since Linux 2.6.31)
T}
T{
.B AF_CAIF
T}:T{
.\" commit: 529d6dad5bc69de14cdd24831e2a14264e93daa4
.\" https://lwn.net/Articles/371017/
.\" http://read.pudn.com/downloads157/doc/comm/698729/Misc/caif/Com%20CPU%20to%20Appl%20CPU%20Interface%20DESCRIPTION_LZN901%202002_revR1C.pdf
.\" http://read.pudn.com/downloads157/doc/comm/698729/Misc/caif/Com%20CPU%20to%20Appl%20CPU%20Interface%20PROTOCOL%20SPECIFICATION_LZN901%201708_revR1A.pdf
Ericsson's Communication CPU to Application CPU interface (CAIF) protocol
(since Linux 2.6.36)
T}
T{
.B AF_ALG
T}:T{
.\" commit: 03c8efc1ffeb6b82a22c1af8dd908af349563314
Interface to kernel crypto API (since Linux 2.6.38)
T}
T{
.B AF_VSOCK
T}:T{
.\" commit: d021c344051af91f42c5ba9fdedc176740cbd238
VMWare VSockets protocol for hypervisor-guest interaction (since Linux 3.9);
has no relation to
.B AF_IUCV
and/or
.BR AF_SMC
T}:T{
.BR vsock (7)
T}
T{
.B AF_KCM
T}:T{
.\" commit: 03c8efc1ffeb6b82a22c1af8dd908af349563314
KCM (kernel connection multiplexor) interface (since Linux 4.6)
T}
T{
.B AF_QIPCRTR
T}:T{
.\" commit: bdabad3e363d825ddf9679dd431cca0b2c30f881
Qualcomm IPC router interface protocol (since Linux 4.7)
T}
T{
.B AF_SMC
T}:T{
.\" commit: f3a3e248f3f7cd9a4bed334022704d7e7fc781bf
SMC-R (shared memory communications over RDMA) protocol (since Linux 4.11),
and SMC-D (shared memory communications, direct memory access) protocol
for intra-node z/VM quest interaction (since Linux 4.19);
has no relation to
.BR AF_RDS ", " AF_IUCV
and/org
.BR AF_VSOCK
T}
T{
.B AF_XDP
T}:T{
.\" commit: c0c77d8fb787cfe0c3fca689c2a30d1dad4eaba7
XDP (express data path) interface (since Linux 4.18)
T}
.TE
.PP
The socket has the indicated
.IR type ,
which specifies the communication semantics.
Currently defined types
are:
.TP 16
.B SOCK_STREAM
Provides sequenced, reliable, two-way, connection-based byte streams.
An out-of-band data transmission mechanism may be supported.
.TP
.B SOCK_DGRAM
Supports datagrams (connectionless, unreliable messages of a fixed
maximum length).
.TP
.B SOCK_SEQPACKET
Provides a sequenced, reliable, two-way connection-based data
transmission path for datagrams of fixed maximum length; a consumer is
required to read an entire packet with each input system call.
.TP
.B SOCK_RAW
Provides raw network protocol access.
.TP
.B SOCK_RDM
Provides a reliable datagram layer that does not guarantee ordering.
.TP
.B SOCK_PACKET
Obsolete and should not be used in new programs;
see
.BR packet (7).
.PP
Some socket types may not be implemented by all protocol families.
.PP
Since Linux 2.6.27, the
.I type
argument serves a second purpose:
in addition to specifying a socket type,
it may include the bitwise OR of any of the following values,
to modify the behavior of
.BR socket ():
.TP 16
.B SOCK_NONBLOCK
Set the
.BR O_NONBLOCK
file status flag on the new open file description.
Using this flag saves extra calls to
.BR fcntl (2)
to achieve the same result.
.TP
.B SOCK_CLOEXEC
Set the close-on-exec
.RB ( FD_CLOEXEC )
flag on the new file descriptor.
See the description of the
.B O_CLOEXEC
flag in
.BR open (2)
for reasons why this may be useful.
.PP
The
.I protocol
specifies a particular protocol to be used with the socket.
Normally only a single protocol exists to support a particular
socket type within a given protocol family, in which case
.I protocol
can be specified as 0.
However, it is possible that many protocols may exist, in
which case a particular protocol must be specified in this manner.
The protocol number to use is specific to the \*(lqcommunication domain\*(rq
in which communication is to take place; see
.BR protocols (5).
See
.BR getprotoent (3)
on how to map protocol name strings to protocol numbers.
.PP
Sockets of type
.B SOCK_STREAM
are full-duplex byte streams.
They do not preserve
record boundaries.
A stream socket must be in
a
.I connected
state before any data may be sent or received on it.
A connection to
another socket is created with a
.BR connect (2)
call.
Once connected, data may be transferred using
.BR read (2)
and
.BR write (2)
calls or some variant of the
.BR send (2)
and
.BR recv (2)
calls.
When a session has been completed a
.BR close (2)
may be performed.
Out-of-band data may also be transmitted as described in
.BR send (2)
and received as described in
.BR recv (2).
.PP
The communications protocols which implement a
.B SOCK_STREAM
ensure that data is not lost or duplicated.
If a piece of data for which
the peer protocol has buffer space cannot be successfully transmitted
within a reasonable length of time, then the connection is considered
to be dead.
When
.B SO_KEEPALIVE
is enabled on the socket the protocol checks in a protocol-specific
manner if the other end is still alive.
A
.B SIGPIPE
signal is raised if a process sends or receives
on a broken stream; this causes naive processes,
which do not handle the signal, to exit.
.B SOCK_SEQPACKET
sockets employ the same system calls as
.B SOCK_STREAM
sockets.
The only difference is that
.BR read (2)
calls will return only the amount of data requested,
and any data remaining in the arriving packet will be discarded.
Also all message boundaries in incoming datagrams are preserved.
.PP
.B SOCK_DGRAM
and
.B SOCK_RAW
sockets allow sending of datagrams to correspondents named in
.BR sendto (2)
calls.
Datagrams are generally received with
.BR recvfrom (2),
which returns the next datagram along with the address of its sender.
.PP
.B SOCK_PACKET
is an obsolete socket type to receive raw packets directly from the
device driver.
Use
.BR packet (7)
instead.
.PP
An
.BR fcntl (2)
.B F_SETOWN
operation can be used to specify a process or process group to receive a
.B SIGURG
signal when the out-of-band data arrives or
.B SIGPIPE
signal when a
.B SOCK_STREAM
connection breaks unexpectedly.
This operation may also be used to set the process or process group
that receives the I/O and asynchronous notification of I/O events via
.BR SIGIO .
Using
.B F_SETOWN
is equivalent to an
.BR ioctl (2)
call with the
.B FIOSETOWN
or
.B SIOCSPGRP
argument.
.PP
When the network signals an error condition to the protocol module (e.g.,
using an ICMP message for IP) the pending error flag is set for the socket.
The next operation on this socket will return the error code of the pending
error.
For some protocols it is possible to enable a per-socket error queue
to retrieve detailed information about the error; see
.B IP_RECVERR
in
.BR ip (7).
.PP
The operation of sockets is controlled by socket level
.IR options .
These options are defined in
.IR <sys/socket.h> .
The functions
.BR setsockopt (2)
and
.BR getsockopt (2)
are used to set and get options, respectively.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, a file descriptor for the new socket is returned.
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EACCES
Permission to create a socket of the specified type and/or protocol
is denied.
.TP
.B EAFNOSUPPORT
The implementation does not support the specified address family.
.TP
.B EINVAL
Unknown protocol, or protocol family not available.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.\" Since Linux 2.6.27
Invalid flags in
.IR type .
.TP
.B EMFILE
The per-process limit on the number of open file descriptors has been reached.
.TP
.B ENFILE
The system-wide limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
.TP
.BR ENOBUFS " or " ENOMEM
Insufficient memory is available.
The socket cannot be
created until sufficient resources are freed.
.TP
.B EPROTONOSUPPORT
The protocol type or the specified protocol is not
supported within this domain.
.PP
Other errors may be generated by the underlying protocol modules.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008, 4.4BSD.
.PP
The
.B SOCK_NONBLOCK
and
.B SOCK_CLOEXEC
flags are Linux-specific.
.PP
.BR socket ()
appeared in 4.2BSD.
It is generally portable to/from
non-BSD systems supporting clones of the BSD socket layer (including
System\ V variants).
.SH NOTES
POSIX.1 does not require the inclusion of
.IR <sys/types.h> ,
and this header file is not required on Linux.
However, some historical (BSD) implementations required this header
file, and portable applications are probably wise to include it.
.PP
The manifest constants used under 4.x BSD for protocol families
are
.BR PF_UNIX ,
.BR PF_INET ,
and so on, while
.BR AF_UNIX ,
.BR AF_INET ,
and so on are used for address
families.
However, already the BSD man page promises: "The protocol
family generally is the same as the address family", and subsequent
standards use AF_* everywhere.
.PP
The
.B AF_ALG
protocol type was added in Linux 2.6.38.
More information on this interface is provided with the kernel HTML
documentation at
.IR https://www.kernel.org/doc/htmldocs/crypto\-API/User.html .
.PP
The
.B AF_XDP
protocol type was added in Linux 4.18.
More information on this interface is provided in the kernel source file
.IR Documentation/networking/af_xdp.rst .
.SH EXAMPLE
An example of the use of
.BR socket ()
is shown in
.BR getaddrinfo (3).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR accept (2),
.BR bind (2),
.BR close (2),
.BR connect (2),
.BR fcntl (2),
.BR getpeername (2),
.BR getsockname (2),
.BR getsockopt (2),
.BR ioctl (2),
.BR listen (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR recv (2),
.BR select (2),
.BR send (2),
.BR shutdown (2),
.BR socketpair (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR getprotoent (3),
.BR ip (7),
.BR socket (7),
.BR tcp (7),
.BR udp (7),
.BR unix (7)
.PP
\(lqAn Introductory 4.3BSD Interprocess Communication Tutorial\(rq
and
\(lqBSD Interprocess Communication Tutorial\(rq,
reprinted in
.I UNIX Programmer's Supplementary Documents Volume 1.
