.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)socketpair.2	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/10/91
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2002-07-22 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\" Modified 2004-06-17 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.TH SOCKETPAIR 2 2004-06-17 "Linux 2.6.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
socketpair \- create a pair of connected sockets
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.sp
.BI "int socketpair(int " d ", int " type ", int " protocol ", int " sv [2]);
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I socketpair
call creates an unnamed pair of connected sockets in
the specified domain
.IR d ,
of the specified
.IR type ,
and using the optionally specified
.IR protocol .
The descriptors used in referencing the new sockets are returned in
.IR sv [0]
and
.IR sv [1].
The two sockets are indistinguishable.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EAFNOSUPPORT
The specified address family is not supported on this machine.
.TP
.B EFAULT
The address
.I sv
does not specify a valid part of the process address space.
.TP
.B EMFILE
Too many descriptors are in use by this process.
.TP
.B ENFILE
The system limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
The specified protocol does not support creation of socket pairs.
.TP
.B EPROTONOSUPPORT
The specified protocol is not supported on this machine.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
4.4BSD, SUSv2, POSIX 1003.1-2001.
The
.B socketpair
function call appeared in 4.2BSD. It is generally portable to/from
non-BSD systems supporting clones of the BSD socket layer (including
System V variants).
.SH NOTES
On Linux, the only supported domain for this call is 
.BR AF_UNIX
(or synonymously,
.BR AF_LOCAL ).
(Most implementations have the same restriction.)
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pipe (2),
.BR read (2),
.BR socket (2),
.BR write (2),
.BR unix (7)
