.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\" and Copyright (c) 2011 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:02:47 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 15 Apr 1995 by Michael Chastain <mec@shell.portal.com>:
.\"   Added reference to `bdflush(2)'.
.\" Modified 960414 by Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>:
.\"   Added the fact that since 1.3.20 sync actually waits.
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:27:07 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2001-10-10 by aeb, following Michael Kerrisk.
.\" 2011-09-07, mtk, Added syncfs() documentation,
.\"
.TH SYNC 2 2021-03-22 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sync, syncfs \- commit filesystem caches to disk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <unistd.h>
.PP
.B void sync(void);
.PP
.BI "int syncfs(int " fd );
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR sync ():
.nf
    _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 500
.\"    || _XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
        || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
        || /* Glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE
.fi
.PP
.BR syncfs ():
.nf
    _GNU_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR sync ()
causes all pending modifications to filesystem metadata and cached file
data to be written to the underlying filesystems.
.PP
.BR syncfs ()
is like
.BR sync (),
but synchronizes just the filesystem containing file
referred to by the open file descriptor
.IR fd .
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR syncfs ()
returns 0 on success;
on error, it returns \-1 and sets
.I errno
to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.BR sync ()
is always successful.
.PP
.BR syncfs ()
can fail for at least the following reasons:
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EIO
An error occurred during synchronization.
This error may relate to data written to any file on the filesystem, or on
metadata related to the filesystem itself.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
Disk space was exhausted while synchronizing.
.TP
.BR ENOSPC ", " EDQUOT
Data was written to a file on NFS or another filesystem which does not
allocate space at the time of a
.BR write (2)
system call, and some previous write failed due to insufficient
storage space.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR syncfs ()
first appeared in Linux 2.6.39;
library support was added to glibc in version 2.14.
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR sync ():
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008, SVr4, 4.3BSD.
.PP
.BR syncfs ()
is Linux-specific.
.SH NOTES
Since glibc 2.2.2, the Linux prototype for
.BR sync ()
is as listed above,
following the various standards.
In glibc 2.2.1 and earlier,
it was "int sync(void)", and
.BR sync ()
always returned 0.
.PP
According to the standard specification (e.g., POSIX.1-2001),
.BR sync ()
schedules the writes, but may return before the actual
writing is done.
However Linux waits for I/O completions,
and thus
.BR sync ()
or
.BR syncfs ()
provide the same guarantees as
.BR fsync ()
called on every file in
the system or filesystem respectively.
.PP
In mainline kernel versions prior to 5.8,
.BR syncfs ()
will fail only when passed a bad file descriptor
.RB ( EBADF ).
Since Linux 5.8,
.\" commit 735e4ae5ba28c886d249ad04d3c8cc097dad6336
.BR syncfs ()
will also report an error if one or more inodes failed
to be written back since the last
.BR syncfs ()
call.
.SH BUGS
Before version 1.3.20 Linux did not wait for I/O to complete
before returning.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sync (1),
.BR fdatasync (2),
.BR fsync (2)
