.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Andrew Morton <akpm@osdl.org>
.\" and Copyright 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk-manpages@gmx.net>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" 2006-07-05 Initial creation, Michael Kerrisk based on 
.\"     Andrew Morton's comments in fs/sync.c
.\"
.TH SYNC_FILE_RANGE 2 2006-07-05 "Linux 2.6.17" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
sync_file_range \- sync a file segment with disk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #define _GNU_SOURCE
.B #include <fcntl.h>

.BI "void sync_file_range(int " fd ", off64_t " offset ", off64_t " nbytes , 
.BI "                     unsigned int " flags );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR sync_file_range ()
permits fine control when synchronising the open file referred to by the
file descriptor
.I fd
with disk.

.I offset 
is the starting byte of the file range to be synchronised.
.I nbytes 
specifies the length of the range to be synchronised, in bytes; if
.I nbytes
is zero, then all bytes from 
.I offset
through to the end of file are synchronised.
Synchronisation is in units of the system page size:
.I offset 
is rounded down to a page boundary;
.I (offset+nbytes-1) 
is rounded up to a page boundary.

The 
.I flags 
bit-mask argument can include any of the following values:
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE
Wait upon write-out of all pages in the specified range
that have already been submitted to the device driver for write-out
before performing any write.
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WRITE
Initiate write-out of all dirty pages in the specified
range which are not presently submitted write-out.
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_AFTER
Wait upon write-out of all pages in the range
after performing any write.
.PP
Specifying
.I flags
as 0 is permitted, as a no-op.
.SH NOTES
None of these operations write out the file's metadata.  
Therefore, unless the application is strictly performing overwrites of
already-instantiated disk blocks, 
there are no guarantees that the data will be available after a crash.

.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE 
and 
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_AFTER 
will detect any
I/O errors or 
.B ENOSPC 
conditions and will return these to the caller.

Useful combinations of the 
.I flags 
bits are:
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE | SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WRITE
Ensures that all pages
in the specified range which were dirty when 
.BR sync_file_range () 
was called are placed
under write-out.  
This is a start-write-for-data-integrity operation.
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WRITE
Start write-out of all dirty pages in the specified range which
are not presently under write-out.  This is an asynchronous flush-to-disk
operation.  
This is not suitable for data integrity operations.
.TP
.BR SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE " (or " SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_AFTER )
Wait for
completion of write-out of all pages in the specified range.  
This can be used after an earlier 
SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE | SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WRITE 
operation to wait for completion of that operation, and obtain its result.
.TP
.B SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_BEFORE | SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WRITE | SYNC_FILE_RANGE_WAIT_AFTER
This is a traditional 
.BR fdatasync(2) 
operation.
It is a write-for-data-integrity operation
that will ensure that all pages in the specified range which were dirty when
.BR sync_file_range() 
was called are committed to disk.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B EIO
I/O error.
.TP
.B EINVAL
.I flags
specifies an invalid bit; or 
.I offset
or
.I nbytes
is invalid.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Out of memory.
.TP
.B ENOSPC
Out of disk space.
.TP
.B ESPIPE
.I fd
refers to something other than a regular file, a block device, 
a directory, or a symbolic link.
.\" FIXME . (bug?) Actually, how can 'fd' refer to a symbolic link (S_ISLNK)?  
.\" (In userspace at least) it isn't possible to obtain a file descriptor 
.\" for a symbolic link.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This system call is Linux specific, and should be avoided 
in portable programs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fdatasync (2),
.BR fsync (2),
.BR msync (2),
.BR sync (2)
