.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 12:51:53 1993 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified Tue Oct 22 22:39:04 1996 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified Thu May  1 06:05:54 UTC 1997 by Nicolás Lichtmaier
.\"  <nick@debian.com> with Lars Wirzenius <liw@iki.fi> suggestion
.TH UMASK 2 1998-08-09 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
umask \- set file mode creation mask
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/stat.h>
.sp
.BI "mode_t umask(mode_t " mask );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR umask ()
sets the calling process's file mode creation mask (umask) to 
.I mask 
& 0777.

The umask is used by
.BR open (2),
.BR mkdir (2),
and other system calls that create files
.\" e.g., mkfifo(), creat(), mknod(), sem_open(), mq_open(), shm_open()
.\" but NOT the System V IPC *get() calls
to modify the permissions placed on newly created files or directories.
Specifically, permissions in the umask are turned off from
the \fBmode\fR argument to
.BR open (2)
and
.BR mkdir (2)
(so, for example, the common umask default value of 022 results in new
files being created with permissions 0666 & ~022 = 0644 = rw-r--r--
in the usual case where the \fBmode\fR is specified to
.BR open (2)
as 0666).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
This system call always succeeds and the previous value of the mask
is returned.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVr4, SVID, POSIX, X/OPEN, BSD 4.3
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR chmod (2),
.BR mkdir (2),
.BR open (2)
