.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1992 Drew Eckhardt (drew@cs.colorado.edu), March 28, 1992
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Modified by Michael Haardt <michael@moria.de>
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith <faith@cs.unc.edu>
.\" Modified 1996-10-22 by Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>
.\" Modified 2004-06-23 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk16@ext.canterbury.ac.nz>
.\"
.TH USELIB 2 2004-06-23 "Linux 2.6.7" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
uselib \- select shared library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "int uselib(const char *" library );
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBuselib\fP selects the shared library binary that will be used by
the calling process.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
In addition to all of the error codes returned by
.BR open (2)
and
.BR mmap (2),
the following may also be returned:

.TP
.B EACCES
The library specified by
.I library
is not readable, or the caller does not have search permission
for one of the directories in the path prefix. (See also
.BR path_resolution (2).)
.TP
.B ENFILE
The system limit on the total number of open files has been reached.
.TP
.B ENOEXEC
The file specified by
.I library
is not executable, or does not have the correct magic numbers.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
\fBuselib()\fP is Linux specific, and should not be used in programs
intended to be portable.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ar (1),
.BR gcc (1),
.BR ld (1),
.BR ldd (1),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR open (2),
.BR capability (7),
.BR ld.so (8)
