.\" Copyright (c) 2016 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"
.TH CGROUP_NAMESPACES 7 2016-05-05 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
cgroup_namespaces \- overview of Linux cgroup namespaces
.SH DESCRIPTION
For an overview of namespaces, see
.BR namespaces (7).

Cgroup namespaces virtualize the view of a process's cgroups (see
.BR cgroups (7))
as seen via
.IR /proc/[pid]/cgroup
and
.IR /proc/[pid]/mountinfo .

Each cgroup namespace has its own set of cgroup root directories,
which are the base points for the relative locations displayed in
.IR /proc/[pid]/cgroup .
When a process creates a new cgroup namespace using
.BR clone (2)
or
.BR unshare (2)
with the
.BR CLONE_NEWCGROUP
flag, it enters a new cgroup namespace in which its current
cgroups directories become the cgroup root directories
of the new namespace.
(This applies both for the cgroups version 1 hierarchies
and the cgroups version 2 unified hierarchy.)

When viewing
.IR /proc/[pid]/cgroup ,
the pathname shown in the third field of each record will be
relative to the reading process's cgroup root directory.
If the cgroup directory of the target process lies outside
the root directory of the reading process's cgroup namespace,
then the pathname will show
.I ../
entries for each ancestor level in the cgroup hierarchy.

The following shell session demonstrates the effect of creating
a new cgroup namespace.
First, (as superuser) we create a child cgroup in the
.I freezer
hierarchy, and put the shell into that cgroup:

.nf
.in +4n
# \fBmkdir \-p /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer/sub\fP
# \fBecho $$\fP                      # Show PID of this shell
30655
# \fBsh \-c 'echo 30655 > /sys/fs/cgroup/sub'\fP
# \fBcat /proc/self/cgroup | grep freezer\fP
7:freezer:/sub
.in
.fi

Next, we use
.BR unshare (1)
to create a process running a new shell in new cgroup and mount namespaces:

.nf
.in +4n
# \fBunshare \-Cm bash\fP
.in
.fi

We then inspect the
.IR /proc/[pid]/cgroup
files of, respectively, the new shell process started by the
.BR unshare (1)
command, a process that is in the original cgroup namespace
.RI ( init ,
with PID 1), and a process in a sibling cgroup:

.nf
.in +4n
$ \fBcat /proc/self/cgroup | grep freezer\fP
7:freezer:/
$ \fBcat /proc/1/cgroup | grep freezer\fP
7:freezer:/..
$ \fBcat /proc/20124/cgroup | grep freezer\fP
7:freezer:/../sub2
.in
.fi

However, when we look in
.IR /proc/self/mountinfo
we see the following anomaly:

.nf
.in +4n
# \fBcat /proc/self/mountinfo | grep freezer\fP
155 145 0:32 /.. /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer ...
.in
.fi

The fourth field of this file should show the
directory in the cgroup filesystem which forms the root of this mount.
Since by the definition of cgroup namespaces, the process's current
freezer cgroup directory became its root freezer cgroup directory,
we should see \(aq/\(aq in this field.
The problem here is that we are seeing a mount entry for the cgroup
filesystem corresponding to our initial shell process's cgroup namespace
(whose cgroup filesystem is indeed rooted in the parent directory of
.IR sub ).
We need to remount the freezer cgroup filesystem
inside this cgroup namespace, after which we see the expected results:

.nf
.in +4n
# \fBmount \-\-make\-rslave /\fP     # Don't propagate mount events
                            # to other namespaces
# \fBumount /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer\fP
# \fBmount \-t cgroup \-o freezer freezer /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer\fP
# \fBcat /proc/self/mountinfo | grep freezer\fP
155 145 0:32 / /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer rw,relatime ...
.in
.fi

Use of cgroup namespaces requires a kernel that is configured with the
.B CONFIG_CGROUPS
option.
.\"
.SH NOTES
Among the purposes served by the
virtualization provided by cgroup namespaces are the following:
.IP * 2
It prevents information leaks whereby cgroup directory paths outside of
a container would otherwise be visible to processes in the container.
Such leakages could, for example,
reveal information about the container framework
to containerized applications.
.IP *
It eases tasks such as container migration.
The virtualization provided by cgroup namespaces
allows containers to be isolated from knowledge of
the pathnames of ancestor cgroups.
Without such isolation, the full cgroup pathnames (displayed in
.IR /proc/self/cgroups )
would need to be replicated on the target system when migrating a container;
those pathnames would also need to be unique,
so that they don't conflict with other pathnames on the target system.
.IP *
It allows better confinement of containerized processes,
because it is possible to mount the container's cgroup filesystems such that
the container processes can't gain access to ancestor cgroup directories.
Consider, for example, the following scenario:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
We have a cgroup directory,
.IR /cg/1 ,
that is owned by user ID 9000.
.IP \(bu
We have a process,
.IR X ,
also owned by user ID 9000,
that is namespaced under the cgroup
.IR /cg/1/2
(i.e.,
.I X
was placed in a new cgroup namespace via
.BR clone (2)
or
.BR unshare (2)
with the
.BR CLONE_NEWCGROUP
flag).
.RE
.IP
In the absence of cgroup namespacing, because the cgroup directory
.IR /cg/1
is owned (and writable) by UID 9000 and process
.I X
is also owned by user ID 9000, then process
.I X
would be able to modify the contents of cgroups files
(i.e., change cgroup settings) not only in
.IR /cg/1/2
but also in the ancestor cgroup directory
.IR /cg/1 .
Namespacing process
.IR X
under the cgroup directory
.IR /cg/1/2 ,
in combination with suitable mount operations
for the cgroup filesystem (as shown above),
prevents it modifying files in
.IR /cg/1 ,
since it cannot even see the contents of that directory
(or of further removed cgroup ancestor directories).
Combined with correct enforcement of hierarchical limits,
this prevents process
.I X
from escaping the limits imposed by ancestor cgroups.
.SH CONFORMING TO
Namespaces are a Linux-specific feature.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR unshare (1),
.BR clone (2),
.BR setns (2),
.BR unshare (2),
.BR proc (5),
.BR cgroups (7),
.BR credentials (7),
.BR namespaces (7)
.BR user_namespaces (7)
