.\" Copyright (c) 2019 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"
.TH IPC_NAMESPACES 7 2019-08-02 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ipc_namespaces \- overview of Linux IPC namespaces
.SH DESCRIPTION
IPC namespaces isolate certain IPC resources,
namely, System V IPC objects (see
.BR sysvipc (7))
and (since Linux 2.6.30)
.\" commit 7eafd7c74c3f2e67c27621b987b28397110d643f
.\" https://lwn.net/Articles/312232/
POSIX message queues (see
.BR mq_overview (7)).
The common characteristic of these IPC mechanisms is that IPC
objects are identified by mechanisms other than filesystem
pathnames.
.PP
Each IPC namespace has its own set of System V IPC identifiers and
its own POSIX message queue filesystem.
Objects created in an IPC namespace are visible to all other processes
that are members of that namespace,
but are not visible to processes in other IPC namespaces.
.PP
The following
.I /proc
interfaces are distinct in each IPC namespace:
.IP * 3
The POSIX message queue interfaces in
.IR /proc/sys/fs/mqueue .
.IP *
The System V IPC interfaces in
.IR /proc/sys/kernel ,
namely:
.IR msgmax ,
.IR msgmnb  ,
.IR msgmni ,
.IR sem ,
.IR shmall ,
.IR shmmax ,
.IR shmmni ,
and
.IR shm_rmid_forced .
.IP *
The System V IPC interfaces in
.IR /proc/sysvipc .
.PP
When an IPC namespace is destroyed
(i.e., when the last process that is a member of the namespace terminates),
all IPC objects in the namespace are automatically destroyed.
.PP
Use of IPC namespaces requires a kernel that is configured with the
.B CONFIG_IPC_NS
option.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nsenter (1),
.BR unshare (1),
.BR clone (2),
.BR setns (2),
.BR unshare (2),
.BR mq_overview (7),
.BR namespaces (7),
.BR sysvipc (7)
