.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 2000 Stein Gjoen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.TH "LDP Introduction" 7 2001-11-15 "LDP"
.SH NAME
LDP \- Intro to the Linux Documentation Project, with help, guides and documents
.SH SYNOPSIS
The Linux Documentation Project (LDP) provides a variety of
free documentation resources including
guides, FAQs, HOWTOs, and man-pages to the Linux community.

.SH AUTHORS
The various documents in the LDP archives are maintained by individual
authors, and are listed in the beginning of each HOWTO. If you have
any questions or inputs to a document we encourage you to contact the
authors directly.

.SH "WEB PAGES"
The LDP has its own dedicated web site as do many of
the various translations projects which are linked from the
main LDP web site at
.RS
\fBhttp://www\&.tldp\&.org/\fP
.RE
which you may wish to bookmark.

.SH "MAN PAGES"
A web page with status information for manual pages and translations
is found at
.RS
\fBhttp://www\&.win\&.tue\&.nl/~aeb/linux/man/\fP
.RE

.SH "MAILING LISTS"
LDP has a number of mailing lists, such as
.PP
.PD 0
.TP
.PD
\fB<announce@en\&.tlpd\&.org>\fP
Announcements from the LDP project
.TP
\fB<discuss@en\&.tldp\&.org>\fP
General discussion on the LDP project
.TP
\fB<docbook@en\&.tldp\&.org>\fP
Questions about the use of DocBook
.PP
For subscription information, see the website.
.PP
If you are interested in DocBook beyond the simple markup of your LDP
document, you may want to consider joining one of the OASIS DocBook
mailing lists. Please see
\fBhttp://docbook\&.org/mailinglist/index\&.html\fP
for more information.

.SH FILES
Most distributions include the HOWTOs and mini-HOWTOs in the installation
.PD 0
.TP
\fB/usr/doc/\fP                   (old place for documentation)
.TP
\fB/usr/share/doc/\fP             (new place for documentation)
.TP
\fB/usr/share/doc/HOWTO/\fP       (HOWTO files)
.TP
\fB/usr/share/doc/HOWTO/mini/\fP  (mini-HOWTO files)
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR info (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR xman (1x)
.PP
\fBinfo\fP pages as read with
.BR emacs (1)
or
.BR info (1)
