'\" t
.\" Don't remove the line above, it tells man that tbl is needed.
.\" This man page is Copyright (C) 1999 Andi Kleen <ak@muc.de>.
.\" Permission is granted to distribute possibly modified copies
.\" of this page provided the header is included verbatim,
.\" and in case of nontrivial modification author and date
.\" of the modification is added to the header.
.\" Based on the original comments from Alexey Kuznetsov, written with
.\" help from Matthew Wilcox. 
.\" $Id: rtnetlink.7,v 1.8 2000/01/22 01:55:04 freitag Exp $
.TH RTNETLINK  7 1999-04-30 "Linux Man Page" "Linux Programmer's Manual" 
.SH NAME
rtnetlink, NETLINK_ROUTE \- Linux IPv4 routing socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <asm/types.h>
.br
.B #include <linux/netlink.h>
.br
.B #include <linux/rtnetlink.h>
.br
.B #include <sys/socket.h>

.BI "rtnetlink_socket = socket(PF_NETLINK, int " socket_type ", NETLINK_ROUTE);"

.SH DESCRIPTION
Rtnetlink allows the kernel's routing tables to be read and altered.  
It is used within the kernel to communicate between
various subsystems, though this usage is not documented here, and for 
communication with user-space programs.
Network routes, ip addresses, link parameters, neighbour setups, queueing
disciplines, traffic classes and packet classifiers may all be controlled
through
.B NETLINK_ROUTE
sockets.  It is based on netlink messages, see 
.BR netlink (7)
for more information. 

.\" XXX: all these macros could be moved to rtnetlink(3) 

.SH "ROUTING ATTRIBUTES"
Some rtnetlink messages have optional attributes after the initial header:

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct rtattr
{
	unsigned short	rta_len;	/* Length of option */
	unsigned short	rta_type;	/* Type of option */
	/* Data follows */ 
};
.fi

These attributes should be only manipulated using the RTA_* macros or libnetlink,
see
.BR rtnetlink (3).

.SH MESSAGES
Rtnetlink consists of these message types
(in addition to standard netlink messages):
.TP
.BR RTM_NEWLINK ", " RTM_DELLINK ", " RTM_GETLINK
Create, remove or get information about a specific network interface. 
These messages contain an
.B ifinfomsg
structure followed by a series of
.B rtattr
structures.

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct ifinfomsg
{
	unsigned char	ifi_family;	/* AF_UNSPEC */
	unsigned short	ifi_type;	/* Device type */ 
	int	ifi_index;		/* Interface index   */
	unsigned int	ifi_flags;	/* Device flags  */
	unsigned int	ifi_change;	/* change mask */
};
.fi

.\" XXX ifi_type
.B ifi_flags 
contains the device flags, see
.BR netdevice(7);
.B ifi_index
is the unique interface index,
.B ifi_change
is reserved for future use and should be always set to 0xFFFFFFFF. 


.TS
tab(:);
c
l l l.
Routing attributes
rta_type:value type:description
_
IFLA_UNSPEC:-:unspecified.
IFLA_ADDRESS:hardware address:interface L2 address 
IFLA_BROADCAST:hardware address:L2 broadcast address.
IFLA_IFNAME:asciiz string:Device name.
IFLA_MTU:unsigned int:MTU of the device.
IFLA_LINK:int:Link type.
IFLA_QDISC:asciiz string:Queueing discipline.
IFLA_STATS:T{
struct net_device_stats
T}:Interface Statistics.
.TE
.TP	
.BR RTM_NEWADDR ", " RTM_DELADDR ", " RTM_GETADDR	
Add, remove or receive information about an IP address associated with 
an interface. In Linux 2.2 an interface can carry multiple IP addresses,
this replaces the alias device concept in 2.0. In Linux 2.2 these messages
support IPv4 and IPv6 addresses. They contain an
.B ifaddrmsg
structure, optionally followed by
.B rtaddr
routing attributes.

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct ifaddrmsg
{
	unsigned char	ifa_family;	/* Address type */
	unsigned char	ifa_prefixlen;	/* Prefixlength of the address */
	unsigned char	ifa_flags;	/* Address flags */
	unsigned char	ifa_scope;	/* Address scope */
	int	ifa_index;		/* Interface index   */
};
.fi

.B ifa_family
is the address family type (currently 
.B AF_INET
or
.B AF_INET6), 
.B ifa_prefixlen
is the length of the address mask of the address if defined for the 
family (like for IPv4), 
.B ifa_scope
is the address scope,
.B ifa_index
is the interface index of the interface the address is associated with.   
.B ifa_flags
is a flag word of
.B IFA_F_SECONDARY
for secondary address (old alias interface), 
.B IFA_F_PERMANENT
for a permanent address set by the user and other undocumented flags.

.TS
tab(:);
c
l l l.
Attributes
rta_type:value type:description
_
IFA_UNSPEC:-:unspecified.
IFA_ADDRESS:raw protocol address:interface address
IFA_LOCAL:raw protocol address:local address
IFA_LABEL:asciiz string:name of the interface
IFA_BROADCAST:raw protocol address:broadcast address.
IFA_ANYCAST:raw protocol address:anycast address
IFA_CACHEINFO:struct ifa_cacheinfo:Address information. 
.TE

.\" XXX struct ifa_cacheinfo
.TP	
.BR RTM_NEWROUTE ", " RTM_DELROUTE ", " RTM_GETROUTE	
Create, remove or receive information about a network route.
These messages contain an
.B rtmsg
structure with an optional sequence of 
.B rtattr
structures following. For
.B RTM_GETROUTE
setting 
.B rtm_dst_len 
and 
.B rtm_src_len 
to 0 means you get all entries for the specified routing table.
For the other fields except 
.B rtm_table 
and 
.B rtm_protocol
0 is the wildcard.

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct rtmsg
{
	unsigned char	rtm_family;	/* Address family of route */
	unsigned char	rtm_dst_len;	/* Length of source */
	unsigned char	rtm_src_len;	/* Length of destination */ 
	unsigned char	rtm_tos;	/* TOS filter */

	unsigned char	rtm_table;	/* Routing table id */
	unsigned char	rtm_protocol;	/* Routing protocol; see below */
	unsigned char	rtm_scope;	/* See below */	
	unsigned char	rtm_type;	/* See below */

	unsigned int	rtm_flags;	
};
.fi

.TS
tab(:);
l l
l l.
rtm_type:Route type
_
RTN_UNSPEC:unknown route
RTN_UNICAST:a gateway or direct route
RTN_LOCAL:a local interface route
RTN_BROADCAST:T{
a local broadcast route (sent as a broadcast)
T}
RTN_ANYCAST:T{
a local broadcast route (sent as a unicast)
T}
RTN_MULTICAST:a multicast route
RTN_BLACKHOLE:a packet dropping route
RTN_UNREACHABLE:an unreachable destination
RTN_PROHIBIT:a packet rejection route
RTN_THROW:continue routing lookup in another table
RTN_NAT:a network address translation rule
RTN_XRESOLVE:T{
refer to an external resolver (not implemented)
T}
.TE

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
rtm_protocol:Route origin.
_
RTPROT_UNSPEC:unknown
RTPROT_REDIRECT:T{
by an ICMP redirect (currently unused)
T}
RTPROT_KERNEL:by the kernel
RTPROT_BOOT:during boot
RTPROT_STATIC:by the administrator
.TE

Values larger than
.B RTPROT_STATIC
are not interpreted by the kernel, they are just for user information.  They
may be used to tag the source of a routing information or to distingush between
multiple routing daemons. See 
.BR <linux/rtnetlink.h>
for the routing daemon identifiers which are already assigned. 

.B rtm_scope 
is the distance to the destination: 

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
RT_SCOPE_UNIVERSE:global route
RT_SCOPE_SITE:T{
interior route in the local autonomous system
T}
RT_SCOPE_LINK:route on this link
RT_SCOPE_HOST:route on the local host
RT_SCOPE_NOWHERE:destination doesn't exist
.TE

The values between
.B RT_SCOPE_UNIVERSE
and
.B RT_SCOPE_SITE
are available to the user.

The
.B rtm_flags
have the following meanings:

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
RTM_F_NOTIFY:T{
if the route changes, notify the user via rtnetlink
T}
RTM_F_CLONED:route is cloned from another route
RTM_F_EQUALIZE:a multicast equalizer (not yet implemented)
.TE

.B rtm_table
specifies the routing table

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
RT_TABLE_UNSPEC:an unspecified routing table
RT_TABLE_DEFAULT:the default table
RT_TABLE_MAIN:the main table
RT_TABLE_LOCAL:the local table
.TE

The user may assign arbitary values between
.B RT_TABLE_UNSPEC
and
.BR RT_TABLE_DEFAULT .

.TS
tab(:);
c
l l l.
Attributes
rta_type:value type:description
_
RTA_UNSPEC:-:ignored.
RTA_DST:protocol address:Route destination address.
RTA_SRC:protocol address:Route source address.
RTA_IIF:int:Input interface index.
RTA_OIF:int:Output interface index.
RTA_GATEWAY:protocol address:The gateway of the route
RTA_PRIORITY:int:Priority of route.
RTA_PREFSRC::
RTA_METRICS:int:Route metric
RTA_MULTIPATH::
RTA_PROTOINFO::
RTA_FLOW::
RTA_CACHEINFO::
.TE

.B Fill these values in!
.TP	
.BR RTM_NEWNEIGH ", " RTM_DELNEIGH  ", " RTM_GETNEIGH	
Add, remove or receive information about a neighbour table entry (e.g. an ARP
entry).  The message contains an
.B ndmsg
structure.

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct ndmsg
{
	unsigned char	ndm_family;
	int	ndm_ifindex;	/* Interface index */
	__u16	ndm_state;	/* State */ 
	__u8	ndm_flags;	/* Flags */
	__u8	ndm_type;   
};

struct nda_cacheinfo
{
	__u32	ndm_confirmed;
	__u32	ndm_used;
	__u32	ndm_updated;
	__u32	ndm_refcnt;
};
.fi

.B ndm_state
is a bitmask of the following states: 

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
NUD_INCOMPLETE:a currently resolving cache entry
NUD_REACHABLE:a confirmed working cache entry
NUD_STALE:an expired cache entry
NUD_DELAY:an entry waiting for a timer
NUD_PROBE:a cache entry that is currently reprobed
NUD_FAILED:an invalid cache entry
NUD_NOARP:a device with no destination cache
NUD_PERMANENT:a static entry
.TE

Valid
.B ndm_flags
are:

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
NTF_PROXY:a proxy arp entry
NTF_ROUTER:an IPv6 router
.TE

.B document the members of the struct better

The
.B rtaddr
struct has the following meanings for the
.B rta_type
field:

.TS
tab(:);
l l.
NDA_UNSPEC:unknown type
NDA_DST:a neighbour cache network layer destination address
NDA_LLADDR:a neighbour cache link layer address
NDA_CACHEINFO:cache statistics.
.TE

If the
.B rta_type
field is
.B NDA_CACHEINFO
then a
.B struct nda_cacheinfo
header follows
.TP
.BR RTM_NEWRULE ", " RTM_DELRULE ", " RTM_GETRULE
Add, delete or retrieve a routing rule. Carries a 
.B struct rtmsg
.TP
.BR RTM_NEWQDISC ", " RTM_DELQDISC ", " RTM_GETQDISC
Add, remove or get a queueing discipline.  The message contains a
.B struct tcmsg
and may be followed by a series of
attributes.

.nf
.ta 4 19 32
struct tcmsg
{
	unsigned char	tcm_family;
	int	tcm_ifindex;	/* interface index */
	__u32	tcm_handle;	/* Qdisc handle */ 
	__u32	tcm_parent;	/* Parent qdisc */
	__u32	tcm_info;
};
.fi

.TS
tab(:);
c
l l l.
Attributes
rta_type:value type:Description
_
TCA_UNSPEC:-:unspecified
TCA_KIND:asciiz string:Name of queueing discipline
TCA_OPTIONS:byte sequence:Qdisc specific options follow
TCA_STATS:struct tc_stats:Qdisc statistics.
TCA_XSTATS:qdisc specific:Module specific statistics.
TCA_RATE:struct tc_estimator:Rate limit.
.TE

In addition various other qdisc module specific attributes are allowed.
For more information see the appropriate include files.
.TP
.BR RTM_NEWTCLASS ", " RTM_DELTCLASS ", " RTM_GETTCLASS
Add, remove or get a traffic class.  These messages contain a
.B struct tcmsg
as described above.
.TP
.BR RTM_NEWTFILTER ", " RTM_DELTFILTER ", " RTM_GETTFILTER
Add, remove or receive information about a traffic filter.  These
messages contain a
.B struct tcmsg
as described above.
.SH VERSIONS
.B rtnetlink 
is a new feature of Linux 2.2.
.SH BUGS
This manual page is lacking and incomplete.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cmsg (3),
.BR rtnetlink (3),
.BR ip (7),
.BR netlink (7)
