.\" This man page is Copyright (C) 1999 Andi Kleen <ak@muc.de>.
.\" Permission is granted to distribute possibly modified copies
.\" of this page provided the header is included verbatim,
.\" and in case of nontrivial modification author and date
.\" of the modification is added to the header.
.\" $Id: udp.7,v 1.7 2000/01/22 01:55:05 freitag Exp $
.TH UDP  7 1998-10-02 "Linux Man Page" "Linux Programmer's Manual" 
.SH NAME
udp \- User Datagram Protocol for IPv4
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.br
.B #include <netinet/in.h>
.br
.B udp_socket = socket(PF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, 0); 
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is an implemention of the User Datagram Protocol described in RFC768. It 
implements a connectionless, unreliable datagram packet service.
Packets may be reordered or duplicated before they arrive. UDP
generates and checks checksums to catch transmission errors.  

When a UDP socket is created, its local and remote addresses are unspecified.
Datagrams can be sent immediately using 
.BR sendto (2)
or
.BR sendmsg (2)
with a valid destination address as an argument.  When 
.BR connect (2) 
is called on the socket the default destination address is set and datagrams 
can now be sent using 
.BR send (2)
or 
.BR write (2)
without specifying an destination address.
It is still possible to send to other destinations by passing an address to
.BR sendto (2)
or
.BR sendmsg (2).
In order to receive packets the socket can be bound to an local
address first by using
.BR bind (2).
Otherwise the socket layer will automatically assign
a free local port out of the range defined by
.I net.ipv4.ip_local_port_range
and bind the socket to
.IR INADDR_ANY .

All receive operations return only one packet.  When the packet is smaller
than the passed buffer only that much data is returned, when it is bigger
the packet is truncated and the
.B MSG_TRUNC
flag is set.
.I MSG_WAITALL
is not supported.

IP options may be sent or received using the socket options described in 
.BR ip (7).
They are only processed by the kernel when the appropriate sysctl
is enabled (but still passed to the user even when it is turned off). See
.BR ip (7).

When the 
.B MSG_DONTROUTE
flag is set on sending the destination address must refer to an local 
interface address and the packet is only sent to that interface.  

UDP fragments a packet when its total length exceeds the interface MTU
(Maximum Transmission Unit).
A more network friendly alternative is to use path MTU discovery
as described in the
.B IP_MTU_DISCOVER 
section of
.BR ip (7).

.SH "ADDRESS FORMAT"
UDP uses the IPv4 
.B sockaddr_in 
address format described in 
.BR ip (7). 

.SH "ERROR HANDLING"
All fatal errors will be passed to the user as an error return even 
when the socket is not connected. This includes asynchronous errors
received from the network. You may get an error for an earlier packet
that was sent on the same socket.
This behaviour differs from many other BSD socket implementations
which don't pass any errors unless the socket is connected.
Linux's behaviour is mandated by 
.BR RFC1122 .

For compatibility with legacy code it is possible to set the
.B SO_BSDCOMPAT  
SOL_SOCKET option to receive remote errors only when the socket has been 
connected (except for
.B EPROTO
and
.BR EMSGSIZE ).
It is better to fix the
code to handle errors properly than to enable this option.
Locally generated errors are always passed.

When the 
.B IP_RECVERR
option is enabled all errors are stored in the socket error queue
and can be received by
.BR recvmsg (2)
with the 
.B MSG_ERRQUEUE
flag set.
.SH IOCTLS
These ioctls can be accessed using
.BR ioctl (2).
The correct syntax is:
.PP
.RS
.nf
.BI int " value";
.IB error " = ioctl(" tcp_socket ", " ioctl_type ", &" value ");"
.fi
.RE
.TP
.BR FIONREAD " (" SIOCINQ )
Gets a pointer to an integer as argument. Returns the size of the next
pending datagram in the integer in bytes, or 0 when no datagram is pending.
.TP
.BR TIOCOUTQ " (" SIOCOUTQ )
Returns the number of data bytes in the local send queue. Only supported
with Linux 2.4 and above.
.PP
In addition all ioctls documented in
.BR ip (7)
and
.BR socket (7)
are supported.
.SH ERRORS
All errors documented for 
.BR socket (7)
or 
.BR ip (7)
may be returned by a send or receive on a UDP socket. 

.B ECONNREFUSED
No receiver was associated with the destination address.  This might be
caused by a previous packet sent over the socket.

.SH VERSIONS
IP_RECVERR is a new feature in Linux 2.2.

.SH CREDITS
This man page was written by Andi Kleen.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ip (7),
.BR raw (7),
.BR socket (7)

RFC768 for the User Datagram Protocol.
.br
RFC1122 for the host requirements.
.br
RFC1191 for a description of path MTU discovery.
