.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 1999 SuSE GmbH Nuernberg, Germany
.\" Author: Thorsten Kukuk <kukuk@suse.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
.\" License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not,
.\" write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330,
.\" Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.TH NSCD 8 1999-10 "GNU C Library" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
/usr/sbin/nscd - name service cache daemon
.SH DESCRIPTION
Nscd is a daemon that provides a cache for the most common name service
requests. The default configuration file,
.IR /etc/nscd.conf ,
determines the behavior of the cache daemon. See
.BR nscd.conf (5).

Nscd provides cacheing for accesses of the
.BR passwd (5),
.BR group (5),
and
.BR hosts(5)
databases through standard libc interfaces, such as
.BR getpwnam (3),
.BR getpwuid (3),
.BR getgrnam (3),
.BR getgrgid (3),
.BR gethostbyname (3),
and others.

There are two caches for each database:
a positive one for items found, and a negative one
for items not found. Each cache has a separate TTL (time-to-live)
period for its data.
Note that the shadow file is specifically not cached.
.BR getspnam (3)
calls remain uncached as a result.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-\-help"
will give you a list with all options and what they do.

.SH NOTES
Nscd doesn't know anything about the underlaying protocols for a
service. This also means, that if you change
.I /etc/resolv.conf
for DNS queries, nscd will continue to use the old one if you have
configured
.I /etc/nsswitch.conf
to use DNS for host lookups. In such a case, you need to restart
nscd.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR nscd.conf (5),
.BR nsswitch.conf (5)
.SH AUTHOR
.B nscd
was written by Thorsten Kukuk and Ulrich Drepper.
