.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Mon Mar 29 22:39:41 1993, David Metcalfe
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:38:42 1993, Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Dec 17 18:35:06 2000, Joseph S. Myers
.\"
.TH ATOI 3  2021-03-22 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
atoi, atol, atoll \- convert a string to an integer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.PP
.BI "int atoi(const char *" nptr );
.BI "long atol(const char *" nptr );
.BI "long long atoll(const char *" nptr );
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR atoll ():
.nf
    _ISOC99_SOURCE
        || /* Glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR atoi ()
function converts the initial portion of the string
pointed to by \fInptr\fP to
.IR int .
The behavior is the same as
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
strtol(nptr, NULL, 10);
.EE
.in
.PP
except that
.BR atoi ()
does not detect errors.
.PP
The
.BR atol ()
and
.BR atoll ()
functions behave the same as
.BR atoi (),
except that they convert the initial portion of the
string to their return type of \fIlong\fP or \fIlong long\fP.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The converted value or 0 on error.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.ad l
.nh
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR atoi (),
.BR atol (),
.BR atoll ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe locale
.TE
.hy
.ad
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008, C99, SVr4, 4.3BSD.
C89 and
POSIX.1-1996 include the functions
.BR atoi ()
and
.BR atol ()
only.
.\" .SH NOTES
.\" Linux libc provided
.\" .BR atoq ()
.\" as an obsolete name for
.\" .BR atoll ();
.\" .BR atoq ()
.\" is not provided by glibc.
.\" The
.\" .BR atoll ()
.\" function is present in glibc 2 since version 2.0.2, but
.\" not in libc4 or libc5.
.SH NOTES
POSIX.1 leaves the return value of
.BR atoi ()
on error unspecified.
On glibc, musl libc, and uClibc, 0 is returned on error.
.SH BUGS
.I errno
is not set on error so there is no way to distinguish between 0 as an
error and as the converted value.
No checks for overflow or underflow are done.
Only base-10 input can be converted.
It is recommended to instead use the
.BR strtol ()
and
.BR strtoul ()
family of functions in new programs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR atof (3),
.BR strtod (3),
.BR strtol (3),
.BR strtoul (3)
