.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH BTOWC 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
btowc \- convert single byte to wide character
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t btowc(int " c );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBbtowc\fP function converts \fIc\fP, interpreted as a multibyte sequence
of length 1, starting in the initial shift state, to a wide character and
returns it. If \fIc\fP is EOF or not a valid multibyte sequence of length 1,
the \fBbtowc\fP function returns WEOF.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBbtowc\fP function returns the wide character converted from the single
byte \fIc\fP. If \fIc\fP is EOF or not a valid multibyte sequence of length 1,
it returns WEOF.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
ISO/ANSI C, UNIX98
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mbtowc (3)
.SH NOTES
The behaviour of \fBbtowc\fP depends on the LC_CTYPE category of the
current locale.
.PP
This function should never be used. It does not work for encodings which have
state, and unnecessarily treats single bytes differently from multibyte
sequences. Use the function \fBmbtowc\fP instead.
