.\" (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" License.
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:53:02 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.TH CONFSTR 3  1993-04-17 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
confstr \- get configuration dependent string variables
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #define _POSIX_C_SOURCE 2
or
.B #define _XOPEN_SOURCE
.nl
.B #include <unistd.h>
.sp
.BI "size_t confstr(int " "name" ", char *" buf ", size_t " len );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B confstr()
gets the value of configuration-dependent string variables.
.PP
The
.I name
argument is the system variable to be queried.
The following variables are supported:
.TP
.B _CS_PATH
A value for the
.B PATH
variable which indicates where all the POSIX.2 standard utilities can
be found.
.PP
If
.I buf
is not
.BR NULL ,
and 
.I len
is not zero,
.B confstr()
copies the value of the string to
.I buf
truncated to
.I len \- 1
characters if necessary, with a null character as termination.
This can be detected by comparing the return value of
.B confstr()
against
.IR len .
.PP
If
.I len
is zero and
.I buf
is 
.BR NULL ,
.B confstr()
just returns the value as defined below.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
If
.I name
does not correspond to a valid configuration variable,
.B confstr()
returns 0.
.SH EXAMPLES
The following code fragment determines the path where to find
the POSIX.2 system utilities:
.br
.nf
.in 10

char *pathbuf; size_t n;

n = confstr(_CS_PATH,NULL,(size_t)0);
if ((pathbuf = malloc(n)) == NULL) abort();
confstr(_CS_PATH, pathbuf, n);
.SH ERRORS
If the value of
.I name
is invalid,
.I errno
is set to
.BR EINVAL .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
proposed POSIX.2
.SH BUGS
POSIX.2 is not yet an approved standard; the information in this
manpage is subject to change.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sh (1),
.BR exec (3),
.BR system (3)
