.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH DIRFD 3 2002-01-05 "Linux 2.5" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
dirfd \- get directory stream file descriptor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.br
.B #include <dirent.h>
.sp
.BI "int dirfd(DIR *" dir );
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function
.B dirfd()
returns the file descriptor associated with the directory stream
.IR dir .
.LP
This descriptor is the one used internally by the directory stream.
As a result, it is only useful for functions which do not depend on
or alter the file position, such as
.BR fstat (2)
and
.BR fchdir (2).
It will be automatically closed when
.BR closedir (3)
is called.
.SH ERRORS
On error \-1 is returned.
.SH NOTES
The prototype for
.B dirfd
is only available if
.B _BSD_SOURCE
or
.B _SVID_SOURCE
is defined (either explicitly, or implicitly, by not defining
_POSIX_SOURCE or compiling with the -ansi flag).
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
This is a BSD extension, present in 4.3BSD-Reno, not in 4.2BSD.
Present in libc5 (since 5.1.2) and in glibc2.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR open (2),
.BR closedir (3),
.BR opendir (3),
.BR readdir (3),
.BR rewinddir (3),
.BR scandir (3),
.BR seekdir (3),
.BR telldir (3)
