.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 by Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.TH ERF 3  2002-07-27 "BSD" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
erf, erff, erfl, erfc, erfcf, erfcl \- error function and complementary error function
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double erf(double " x );
.sp
.BI "float erff(float " x );
.sp
.BI "long double erfl(long double " x );
.sp
.BI "double erfc(double " x );
.sp
.BI "float erfcf(float " x );
.sp
.BI "long double erfcl(long double " x );
.sp
.fi
Link with \-lm.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBerf()\fP function returns the error function of \fIx\fP; defined
as
.TP
erf(x) = 2/sqrt(pi)* integral from 0 to x of exp(-t*t) dt
.PP
The \fBerfc()\fP function returns the complementary error function of
\fIx\fP, that is 1.0 - erf(x).
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
SVID 3, BSD 4.3, C99.
The float and long double variants are requirements of C99.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR exp (3)
