.\" Copyright (C) 2006 Justin Pryzby <pryzbyj@justinpryzby.com>
.\" and Copyright (C) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk-manpages@gmx.net>
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
.\" a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
.\" distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
.\" permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
.\" the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
.\" included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
.\" SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" References:
.\"   glibc manual and source
.TH ERROR 3 "2006-04-25" GNU
.SH NAME
error, error_at_line, error_message_count, error_on_per_line, \
error_print_progname \- glibc error reporting functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.. #include <error.h>

\fBvoid error(int \fIstatus, \fBint\fI errnum, \
\fBconst char *\fIformat, \fB...);

\fBvoid error_at_line(int \fIstatus, \fBint \fIerrnum, \
\fBconst char *\fIfilename, 
                   \fBunsigned int \fIlinenum, \
\fBconst char *\fIformat, \fB...);

\fBextern unsigned int \fIerror_message_count\fP;

\fBextern int \fIerror_one_per_line\fP;

\fBextern void (* \fIerror_print_progname\fB) (void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBerror\fP() is a general error reporting function.  
It flushes
.IR stdout ,
and then outputs to 
.I stderr 
the program name, a colon and a space, the message specified by the 
.BR printf(3) -style 
format string \fIformat\fP, and, if \fIerrnum\fP is
non-zero, a second colon and a space followed by the string given by
\fBperror(\fIerrnum\fB)\fR.  
Any arguments required for
.I format 
should follow 
.I format
in the argument list.
The output is terminated by a newline character.

The program name printed by 
.BR error ()
is the value of the global variable
.IR program_invocation_name 
(which initially has the same value as
.IR main ()'s
.IR argv[0] ), 
declared as
.IR "extern char *program_invocation_name" 
in 
.IR <errno.h> 
if the feature test macro _GNU_SOURCE is defined.
The value of this variable can be modified to change the output of
.BR error ().

If \fIstatus\fP has a non-zero value, then 
.BR error ()
calls
.BR exit (3)
to terminate the program using the given value as the exit status.

The \fBerror_at_line\fP() function is exactly the same as \fBerror\fP(),
except for the addition of the arguments
.I filename
and
.IR linenum .
The output produced is as for 
.BR error (),
except that after the program name are written: a colon, the value of
.IR filename ,
a colon, and the value of 
.IR linenum .
The preprocessor values \fB__LINE__\fP and
\fB__FILE__\fP may be useful when calling \fBerror_at_line\fP(), 
but other values can also be used.
For example, these arguments could refer to a location in an input file.

If global variable \fIerror_one_per_line\fP is set non-zero, 
a sequence of
\fBerror_at_line\fP() calls with the 
the same value of \fIfilename\fP and \fIlinenum\fP will result in only
one message (the first) being output.  

The global variable \fIerror_message_count\fP counts the number of 
messages that have been output by
\fBerror\fP() and \fBerror_at_line\fP().

If the global variable \fIerror_print_progname\fP 
is assigned the address of a function
(i.e., is not NULL), then that function is called
instead of prefixing the message with the program name and colon.
The function should print a suitable string to
.IR stderr .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
These functions and variables are GNU extensions, and should not be
used in programs intended to be portable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR err (3),
.BR errno (3),
.BR exit (3),
.BR perror (3),
.BR strerror (3)
