.\" Copyright 1995 Jim Van Zandt <jrv@vanzandt.mv.com>
.\" and Copyright 2008, Linux Foundation, written by Michael Kerrisk
.\"     <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified 2002-07-27 Walter Harms
.\" 	(walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\"
.TH EXPM1 3  2021-03-22 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
expm1, expm1f, expm1l \- exponential minus 1
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.PP
.BI "double expm1(double " x );
.BI "float expm1f(float " x );
.BI "long double expm1l(long double " x );
.PP
.fi
Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR expm1 ():
.nf
    _ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200112L
        || _XOPEN_SOURCE >= 500
.\"    || _XOPEN_SOURCE && _XOPEN_SOURCE_EXTENDED
        || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
        || /* Glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.PP
.BR expm1f (),
.BR expm1l ():
.nf
    _ISOC99_SOURCE || _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200112L
        || /* Since glibc 2.19: */ _DEFAULT_SOURCE
        || /* Glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions return a value equivalent to
.PP
.nf
    exp(x) \- 1
.fi
.PP
The result is computed in a way that is accurate even if the value of
.I x
is near
zero\(ema case where
.I "exp(x) \- 1"
would be inaccurate due to
subtraction of two numbers that are nearly equal.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, these functions return
.IR "exp(x)\ \-\ 1" .
.PP
If
.I x
is a NaN,
a NaN is returned.
.PP
If
.I x
is +0 (\-0),
+0 (\-0) is returned.
.PP
If
.I x
is positive infinity, positive infinity is returned.
.PP
If
.I x
is negative infinity, \-1 is returned.
.PP
If the result overflows, a range error occurs,
and the functions return
.RB \- HUGE_VAL ,
.RB \- HUGE_VALF ,
or
.RB \- HUGE_VALL ,
respectively.
.SH ERRORS
See
.BR math_error (7)
for information on how to determine whether an error has occurred
when calling these functions.
.PP
The following errors can occur:
.TP
Range error, overflow
.I errno
is set to
.BR ERANGE
(but see BUGS).
An overflow floating-point exception
.RB ( FE_OVERFLOW )
is raised.
.\"
.\" POSIX.1 specifies an optional range error (underflow) if
.\" x is subnormal.  Glibc does not implement this.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.ad l
.nh
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR expm1 (),
.BR expm1f (),
.BR expm1l ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.hy
.ad
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
C99, POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008.
.\" BSD.
.SH BUGS
Before glibc 2.17,
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6778
on certain architectures (e.g., x86, but not x86_64)
.BR expm1 ()
raised a bogus underflow floating-point exception
for some large negative
.I x
values (where the function result approaches \-1).
.PP
Before approximately glibc version 2.11,
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6814
.\" e.g., expm1(1e5) through expm1(1.00199970127e5),
.\" but not expm1(1.00199970128e5) and beyond.
.BR expm1 ()
raised a bogus invalid floating-point exception in addition to the expected
overflow exception, and returned a NaN instead of positive infinity,
for some large positive
.I x
values.
.PP
Before version 2.11,
.\" It looks like the fix was in 2.11, or possibly 2.12.
.\" I have no test system for 2.11, but 2.12 passes.
.\" From the source (sysdeps/i386/fpu/s_expm1.S) it looks
.\" like the changes were in 2.11.
the glibc implementation did not set
.\" http://sources.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=6788
.I errno
to
.B ERANGE
when a range error occurred.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR exp (3),
.BR log (3),
.BR log1p (3)
