.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" and Copyright (C) 2021 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek and the American National Standards Committee X3,
.\" on Information Processing Systems.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_4_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Converted for Linux, Mon Nov 29 14:24:40 1993, faith@cs.unc.edu
.\" Added remark on EBADF for fileno, aeb, 2001-03-22
.\"
.TH FILENO 3  2021-03-22 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fileno \- obtain file descriptor of a stdio stream
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.PP
.BI "int fileno(FILE *" stream );
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR fileno ():
.nf
    _POSIX_C_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The function
.BR fileno ()
examines the argument
.I stream
and returns the integer file descriptor used to implement this stream.
The file descriptor is still owned by
.I stream
and will be closed when
.BR fclose (3)
is called.
Duplicate the file descriptor with
.BR dup (2)
before passing it to code that might close it.
.PP
For the nonlocking counterpart, see
.BR unlocked_stdio (3).
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR fileno ()
returns the file descriptor associated with
.IR stream .
On failure, \-1 is returned and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.I stream
is not associated with a file.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.ad l
.nh
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR fileno ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.hy
.ad
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
The function
.BR fileno ()
conforms to POSIX.1-2001 and POSIX.1-2008.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR open (2),
.BR fdopen (3),
.BR stdio (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
