.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH FPUTWC 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
fputwc \- write a wide character to a FILE stream
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdio.h>
.br
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t fputwc(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.BI "wint_t putwc(wchar_t " wc ", FILE *" stream );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBfputwc\fP function is the wide-character equivalent of the \fBfputc\fP
function. It writes the wide character \fIwc\fP to \fIstream\fP. If
\fIferror(stream)\fP becomes true, it returns WEOF. If a wide character
conversion error occurs, it sets \fBerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns WEOF.
Otherwise it returns \fIwc\fP.
.PP
The \fBputwc\fP function or macro functions identically to \fBfputwc\fP.
It may be implemented as a macro, and may evaluate its argument
more than once. There is no reason ever to use it.
.PP
For non-locking counterparts, see
.BR unlocked_stdio (3).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBfputwc\fP function returns \fIwc\fP if no error occurred, or WEOF to
indicate an error.
.SH ERRORS
Apart from the usual ones, there is
.TP
.B EILSEQ
Conversion of \fIwc\fP to the stream's encoding fails.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
ISO/ANSI C, UNIX98
.SH NOTES
The behaviour of \fBfputwc\fP depends on the LC_CTYPE category of the
current locale.
.PP
In the absence of additional information passed to the fopen call, it is
reasonable to expect that \fBfputwc\fP will actually write the multibyte
sequence corresponding to the wide character \fIwc\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fgetwc (3),
.BR fputws (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
