.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt
.\" (michael@moria.de)
.\" Fri Apr  2 11:32:09 MET DST 1993
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 14:23:14 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Sun Oct 18 17:31:43 1998 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.TH FTIME 3 2001-12-14 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ftime \- return date and time
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "#include <sys/timeb.h>"
.sp
.BI "int ftime(struct timeb *" tp );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Return current date and time in
.IR tp ,
which is declared as follows:
.sp
.in +1i
.nf
struct timeb {
	time_t   time;
	unsigned short millitm;
	short    timezone;
	short    dstflag;
};
.fi
.in -1i
.LP
Here \fItime\fP is the number of seconds since the epoch,
\fImillitm\fP is the number of milliseconds since \fItime\fP
seconds since the epoch, \fItimezone\fP is the local time zone
measured in minutes of time west of Greenwich, and \fIdstflag\fP
is a flag that, if nonzero, indicates that Daylight Saving time
applies locally during the appropriate part of the year.
.LP
These days the contents of the \fItimezone\fP and \fIdstflag\fP
fields are undefined.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
This function always returns 0.
.SH BUGS
This function is obsolete. Don't use it. If the time in seconds
suffices,
.BR time (2)
can be used;
.BR gettimeofday (2)
gives microseconds;
.BR clock_gettime (3)
gives nanoseconds but is not yet widely available.
.LP
Under libc4 and libc5 the \fImillitm\fP field is meaningful.
But early glibc2 is buggy and returns 0 there;
glibc 2.1.1 is correct again.
.SH HISTORY
The
.B ftime()
function appeared in 4.2BSD.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
BSD 4.2, POSIX 1003.1-2001.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gettimeofday (2),
.BR time (2)
