.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Michael Haardt (michael@moria.de)
.\" and copyright (c) 1999 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\" and copyright (c) 2006 Justin Pryzby <justinpryzby@users.sf.net>
.\" and copyright (c) 2006 Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 11:02:22 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" 2006-05-24, Justin Pryzby <justinpryzby@users.sf.net>
.\"  	document FTW_ACTIONRETVAL; include .SH "RETURN VALUE";
.\" 2006-05-24, Justin Pryzby <justinpryzby@users.sf.net> and
.\"	Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\" 	reorganized and rewrote much of the page
.\" 2006-05-24, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"	Added an example program.
.TH FTW 3 2010-06-10 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
ftw, nftw \- file tree walk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <ftw.h>
.sp
.BI "int ftw(const char *" dirpath ,
.BI "        int (*" fn ") (const char *" fpath ", const struct stat *" sb ,
.BI "                   int " typeflag ),
.BI "        int " nopenfd );
.sp
.B #define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
.B #include <ftw.h>
.sp
.BI "int nftw(const char *" dirpath ,
.BI "        int (*" fn ") (const char *" fpath ", const struct stat *" sb ,
.BI "                   int " typeflag ", struct FTW *" ftwbuf ),
.BI "        int " nopenfd ", int " flags );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR ftw ()
walks through the directory tree that is
located under the directory \fIdirpath\fP,
and calls \fIfn\fP() once for each entry in the tree.
By default, directories are handled before the files and
subdirectories they contain (preorder traversal).

To avoid using up all of the calling process's file descriptors,
\fInopenfd\fP specifies the maximum number of directories that
.BR ftw ()
will hold open simultaneously.
When
the search depth exceeds this,
.BR ftw ()
will become slower because
directories have to be closed and reopened.
.BR ftw ()
uses at most
one file descriptor for each level in the directory tree.

For each entry found in the tree,
.BR ftw ()
calls
\fIfn\fP() with three arguments:
.IR fpath ,
.IR sb ,
and
.IR typeflag .
.I fpath
is the pathname of the entry,
and is expressed either as a pathname relative to the calling process's
current working directory at the time of the call to
.BR ftw (),
if
.IR dirpath
was expressed as a relative pathname,
or as an absolute pathname, if
.I dirpath
was expressed as an absolute pathname.
.I sb
is a pointer to the
.I stat
structure returned by a call to
.BR stat (2)
for
.IR fpath .
.I typeflag
is an integer that has one of the following values:
.TP
.B FTW_F
.I fpath
is a regular file.
.TP
.B FTW_D
.I fpath
is a directory.
.TP
.B FTW_DNR
.I fpath
is a directory which can't be read.
.TP
.B FTW_NS
The
.BR stat (2)
call failed on
.IR fpath ,
which is not a symbolic link.
.sp
If
.I fpath
is a symbolic link and
.BR stat (2)
failed, POSIX.1-2001 states
that it is undefined whether \fBFTW_NS\fP or \fBFTW_SL\fP (see below)
is passed in
.IR typeflag .
.PP
To stop the tree walk, \fIfn\fP() returns a nonzero value; this
value will become the return value of
.BR ftw ().
As long as \fIfn\fP() returns 0,
.BR ftw ()
will continue either until it has traversed the entire tree,
in which case it will return zero,
or until it encounters an error (such as a
.BR malloc (3)
failure), in which case it will return \-1.
.PP
Because
.BR ftw ()
uses dynamic data structures, the only safe way to
exit out of a tree walk is to return a nonzero value from \fIfn\fP().
To allow a signal to terminate the walk without causing a memory leak,
have the handler set a global flag that is checked by \fIfn\fP().
\fIDon't\fP use
.BR longjmp (3)
unless the program is going to terminate.
.SS nftw()
The function
.BR nftw ()
is the same as
.BR ftw (),
except that it has one additional argument, \fIflags\fP,
and calls \fIfn\fP() with one more argument, \fIftwbuf\fP.

This \fIflags\fP argument is formed by ORing zero or more of the
following flags:
.TP
.BR FTW_ACTIONRETVAL " (since glibc 2.3.3)"
If this glibc-specific flag is set, then
.BR nftw ()
handles the return value from
.IR fn ()
differently.
.IR fn ()
should return one of the following values:
.RS
.TP
.B FTW_CONTINUE
Instructs
.BR nftw ()
to continue normally.
.TP
.B FTW_SKIP_SIBLINGS
If \fIfn\fP() returns this value, then
siblings of the current entry will be skipped,
and processing continues in the parent.
.\" If \fBFTW_DEPTH\fP
.\" is set, the entry's parent directory is processed next (with
.\" \fIflag\fP set to \fBFTW_DP\fP).
.TP
.B FTW_SKIP_SUBTREE
If \fIfn\fP() is called with an entry that is a directory
(\fItypeflag\fP is \fBFTW_D\fP), this return
value will prevent objects within that directory from being passed as
arguments to \fIfn\fP().
.BR nftw ()
continues processing with the next sibling of the directory.
.TP
.B FTW_STOP
Causes
.BR nftw ()
to return immediately with the return value
\fBFTW_STOP\fP.
.PP
Other return values could be associated with new actions in the future;
\fIfn\fP() should not return values other than those listed above.

The feature test macro
.B _GNU_SOURCE
must be defined
(before including
.I any
header files)
in order to
obtain the definition of \fBFTW_ACTIONRETVAL\fP from \fI<ftw.h>\fP.
.RE
.TP
.B FTW_CHDIR
If set, do a
.BR chdir (2)
to each directory before handling its contents.
This is useful if the program needs to perform some action
in the directory in which \fIfpath\fP resides.
.TP
.B FTW_DEPTH
If set, do a post-order traversal, that is, call \fIfn\fP() for
the directory itself \fIafter\fP handling the contents of the directory
and its subdirectories.
(By default, each directory is handled \fIbefore\fP its contents.)
.TP
.B FTW_MOUNT
If set, stay within the same file system
(i.e., do not cross mount points).
.TP
.B FTW_PHYS
If set, do not follow symbolic links.
(This is what you want.)
If not set, symbolic links are followed, but no file is reported twice.
.sp
If \fBFTW_PHYS\fP is not set, but \fBFTW_DEPTH\fP is set,
then the function
.IR fn ()
is never called for a directory that would be a descendant of itself.
.LP
For each entry in the directory tree,
.BR nftw ()
calls
.IR fn ()
with four arguments.
.I fpath
and
.I sb
are as for
.BR ftw ().
.I typeflag
may receive any of the same values as with
.BR ftw (),
or any of the following values:
.TP
.B FTW_DP
.I fpath
is a directory, and \fBFTW_DEPTH\fP was specified in \fIflags\fP.
All of the files
and subdirectories within \fIfpath\fP have been processed.
.TP
.B FTW_SL
.I fpath
is a symbolic link, and \fBFTW_PHYS\fP was set in \fIflags\fP.
.\" To obtain the definition of this constant from
.\" .IR <ftw.h> ,
.\" either
.\" .B _BSD_SOURCE
.\" must be defined, or
.\" .BR _XOPEN_SOURCE
.\" must be defined with a value of 500 or more.
.TP
.B FTW_SLN
.I fpath
is a symbolic link pointing to a nonexistent file.
(This occurs only if \fBFTW_PHYS\fP is not set.)
.LP
The fourth argument that
.BR nftw ()
supplies when calling
\fIfn\fP()
is a structure of type \fIFTW\fP:
.in +4n
.nf

struct FTW {
    int base;
    int level;
};

.fi
.in
.I base
is the offset of the filename (i.e., basename component)
in the pathname given in
.IR fpath .
.I level
is the depth of
.I fpath
in the directory tree, relative to the root of the tree
.RI ( dirpath ,
which has depth 0).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
These functions return 0 on success, and \-1 if an error occurs.

If \fIfn\fP() returns nonzero,
then the tree walk is terminated and the value returned by \fIfn\fP()
is returned as the result of
.BR ftw ()
or
.BR nftw ().

If
.BR nftw ()
is called with the \fBFTW_ACTIONRETVAL\fP flag,
then the only nonzero value that should be used by \fIfn\fP()
to terminate the tree walk is \fBFTW_STOP\fP,
and that value is returned as the result of
.BR nftw ().
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX.1-2001, SVr4, SUSv1.
POSIX.1-2008 marks
.BR ftw ()
as obsolete.
.SH NOTES
POSIX.1-2001 note that the results are unspecified if
.I fn
does not preserve the current working directory.
.PP
The function
.BR nftw ()
and the use of \fBFTW_SL\fP with
.BR ftw ()
were introduced in SUSv1.
.LP
On some systems
.BR ftw ()
will never use \fBFTW_SL\fP, on other systems \fBFTW_SL\fP occurs only
for symbolic links that do not point to an existing file,
and again on other systems
.BR ftw ()
will use \fBFTW_SL\fP for each symbolic link.
For predictable control, use
.BR nftw ().
.LP
Under Linux, libc4 and libc5 and glibc 2.0.6 will
use \fBFTW_F\fP for all objects (files, symbolic links, FIFOs, etc.)
that can be stat'ed but are not a directory.

The function
.BR nftw ()
is available since glibc 2.1.

\fBFTW_ACTIONRETVAL\fP is glibc-specific.
.SH EXAMPLE
The following program traverses the directory tree under the path named
in its first command-line argument, or under the current directory
if no argument is supplied.
It displays various information about each file.
The second command-line argument can be used to specify characters that
control the value assigned to the \fIflags\fP
argument when calling
.BR nftw ().
.nf

#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include <ftw.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdint.h>

static int
display_info(const char *fpath, const struct stat *sb,
             int tflag, struct FTW *ftwbuf)
{
    printf("%\-3s %2d %7jd   %\-40s %d %s\\n",
        (tflag == FTW_D) ?   "d"   : (tflag == FTW_DNR) ? "dnr" :
        (tflag == FTW_DP) ?  "dp"  : (tflag == FTW_F) ?   "f" :
        (tflag == FTW_NS) ?  "ns"  : (tflag == FTW_SL) ?  "sl" :
        (tflag == FTW_SLN) ? "sln" : "???",
        ftwbuf\->level, (intmax_t) sb\->st_size,
        fpath, ftwbuf\->base, fpath + ftwbuf\->base);
    return 0;           /* To tell nftw() to continue */
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags = 0;

    if (argc > 2 && strchr(argv[2], \(aqd\(aq) != NULL)
        flags |= FTW_DEPTH;
    if (argc > 2 && strchr(argv[2], \(aqp\(aq) != NULL)
        flags |= FTW_PHYS;

    if (nftw((argc < 2) ? "." : argv[1], display_info, 20, flags)
            == \-1) {
        perror("nftw");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR stat (2),
.BR fts (3),
.BR readdir (3),
.BR feature_test_macros (7)
