.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH FUTIMES 3 2006-03-06 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
futimes \- change access and/or modification times of an open file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/time.h>
.sp
.BI "int futimes(int " fd ", const struct timeval " tv [2]);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR futimes ()
changes the access and modification times of a file in the same way as
.BR utimes (2),
with the difference that the file whose timestamps are to be changed
is specified via a file descriptor, 
.IR fd ,
rather than via a pathname.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
On success, zero is returned.  On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
Errors are as for 
.BR utimes (2),
with the following additions:
.TP
.B EBADF
.I fd
is not a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B ENOSYS
The
.I /proc
file system could not be accessed.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR futimes ()
is available since glibc 2.3.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
4.2BSD.  Other than Linux, this function is only available on the BSDs.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR futimesat (2),
.BR utime (2)
