.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" Inspired by a page written by Walter Harms.
.\"
.TH GETFSENT 3 2002-02-28 "Linux 2.5" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getfsent, getfsspec, getfsfile, setfsent, endfsent \- handle fstab entries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <fstab.h>
.sp
.BI "void endfsent(void);"
.sp
.BI "struct fstab *getfsent(void);"
.sp
.BI "struct fstab *getfsfile(const char *" mount_point );
.sp
.BI "struct fstab *getfsspec(const char *" special_file );
.sp
.BI "int setfsent(void);"
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions read from the file
.IR /etc/fstab .
The struct fstab is defined by
.LP
.nf
struct fstab {
     char *fs_spec;          /* block device name */
     char *fs_file;          /* mount point */
     char *fs_vfstype;       /* filesystem type */
     char *fs_mntops;        /* mount options */
     const char *fs_type;    /* rw/rq/ro/sw/xx option */
     int fs_freq;            /* dump frequency, in days */
     int fs_passno;          /* pass number on parallel dump */
};
.fi
Here the field
.I fs_type
contains (on a *BSD system)
one of the five strings "rw", "rq", "ro", "sw", "xx"
(read-write, read-write with quota, read-only, swap, ignore).

The function
.B setfsent()
opens the file when required and positions it at the first line.
.LP
The function
.B getfsent()
parses the next line from the file.
(After opening it when required.)
.LP
The function
.B endfsent()
closes the file when required.
.LP
The function
.B getfsspec()
searches the file from the start and returns the first entry found
for which the
.I fs_spec
field matches the
.I special_file
argument.
.LP
The function
.B getfsfile()
searches the file from the start and returns the first entry found
for which the
.I fs_file
field matches the
.I mount_point
argument.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Upon success, the functions
.BR getfsent() ,
.BR getfsfile() ,
and
.BR getfsspec()
return a pointer to a struct fstab, while
.BR setfsent()
returns 1.
Upon failure or end-of-file, these functions return NULL and 0, respectively.
.SH HISTORY
The
.B getfsent()
function appeared in 4.0BSD; the other four functions appeared in 4.3BSD.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
These functions are not in POSIX. Several operating systems have them,
e.g., *BSD, SunOS, Digital Unix, AIX (which also has a
.IR getfstype() ).
HP-UX has functions of the same names, that however use a struct checklist
instead of a struct fstab, and calls these functions obsolete, superseded by
.BR getmntent (3).
.SH NOTES
These functions are not thread-safe.
.LP
Since Linux allows mounting a block special device in several places,
and since several devices can have the same mount point, where the
last device with a given mount point is the interesting one,
while
.B getfsfile()
and
.B getfsspec()
only return the first occurrence, these two functions are not suitable
for use under Linux.
.LP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getmntent (3),
.BR fstab (5)
