.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 21:48:06 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.TH GETNETENT 3  1993-05-15 "BSD" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getnetent, getnetbyname, getnetbyaddr, setnetent, endnetent \-
get network entry 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <netdb.h>
.sp
.B struct netent *getnetent(void);
.sp
.BI "struct netent *getnetbyname(const char *" name );
.sp
.BI "struct netent *getnetbyaddr(long " net ", int " type );
.sp
.BI "void setnetent(int " stayopen );
.sp
.B void endnetent(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBgetnetent()\fP function reads the next line from the file
\fI/etc/networks\fP and returns a structure \fInetent\fP containing
the broken out fields from the line.  The \fI/etc/networks\fP file
is opened if necessary.
.PP
The \fBgetnetbyname()\fP function returns a \fInetent\fP structure
for the line from \fI/etc/networks\fP that matches the network
\fIname\fP.
.PP
The \fBgetnetbyaddr()\fP function returns a \fInetent\fP structure
for the line that matches the network number \fInet\fP of type
\fItype\fP.
.PP
The \fBsetnetent()\fP function opens and rewinds the
\fI/etc/networks\fP file.  If \fIstayopen\fP is true (1), then the
file will not be closed between calls to \fBgetnetbyname()\fP and
\fBgetnetbyaddr()\fP.
.PP
The \fBendservent()\fP function closes \fI/etc/networks\fP.
.PP
The \fInetent\fP structure is defined in \fI<netdb.h>\fP as follows:
.sp
.RS
.nf
.ne 6
.ta 8n 16n 34n
struct netent {
	char	*n_name;		/* official network name */
	char	**n_aliases;		/* alias list */
	int	n_addrtype;		/* net address type */
	unsigned long int n_net;	/* network number */
}
.ta
.fi
.RE
.PP
The members of the \fInetent\fP structure are:
.TP
.I n_name
The official name of the network.
.TP
.I n_aliases
A zero terminated list of alternative names for the network.
.TP
.I n_addrtype
The type of the network number; always AF_INET.
.TP
.I n_net
The network number in host byte order.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBgetnetent()\fP, \fBgetnetbyname()\fP and \fBgetnetbyaddr()\fP
functions return the \fInetent\fP structure, or a NULL pointer if an
error occurs or the end of the file is reached.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/networks
networks database file
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
BSD 4.3
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getprotoent (3),
.BR getservent (3),
.BR networks (5)
.br
RFC 1101
