.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification
.\"      http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH GETWCHAR 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
getwchar \- read a wide character from standard input
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t getwchar(void);"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBgetwchar\fP function is the wide-character equivalent of the
\fBgetchar\fP function. It reads a wide character from \fBstdin\fP and returns
it. If the end of stream is reached, or if \fIferror(stdin)\fP becomes
true, it returns WEOF. If a wide character conversion error occurs, it sets
\fBerrno\fP to \fBEILSEQ\fP and returns WEOF.
.PP
For a non-locking counterpart, see
.BR unlocked_stdio (3).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBgetwchar\fP function returns the next wide-character from
standard input, or WEOF.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
ISO/ANSI C, UNIX98
.SH NOTES
The behaviour of \fBgetwchar\fP depends on the LC_CTYPE category of the
current locale.
.PP
It is reasonable to expect that \fBgetwchar\fP will actually read a multibyte
sequence from standard input and then convert it to a wide character.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fgetwc (3),
.BR unlocked_stdio (3)
