.\" Copyright (c) 2012 YOSHIFUJI Hideaki <yoshfuji@linux-ipv6.org>
.\" 
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
.\" a permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume.
.\" no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting.
.\" from the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may.
.\" not have taken the same level of care in the production of this.
.\" manual, which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working.
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH IF_NAMEINDEX 3 2012-11-16 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
if_nameindex, if_freenameindex \- get network interface names and indexes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <net/if.h>
.sp
.BI "struct if_nameindex *if_nameindex(void);
.BI "void if_freenameindex(struct if_nameindex *" "ptr" );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR if_nameindex ()
function creates an array of structures, one structure per
interface, each describing network interface name and
corresponding network index of the local system.

The
.I if_nameindex
structure contains at least the following entries:
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
    unsigned int if_index;  /* 1, 2, ... */
    char *if_name;          /* null terminated name: "eth0", ... */
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I if_index
field contains the interface index,
or zero if this is the last item of the array.
.PP
The
.I ifa_name
field points to the null-terminated interface name,
or NULL pointer if this is the last item of the array.
.PP
The data returned by
.BR if_nameindex ()
is dynamically allocated and should be freed using
.BR if_freenameindex ()
when no longer needed.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success,
.BR if_nameindex ()
returns pointer to the array;
on error, A NULL pointer is returned, and
.I errno
is set appropriately.
.SH ERRORS
.BR if_nameindex ()
may fail and set
.I errno
if:
.TP
.B ENOBUFS
Sufficient resources unavailable.
.PP
.BR if_nameindex ()
may also fail for any of the errors specified for
.BR socket (2),
.BR bind (2),
.BR ioctl (2),
.BR getsockname (2),
.BR recvmsg (2),
.BR sendto (2),
or
.BR malloc (3).
.SH VERSIONS
The
.BR if_nameindex ()
function first appeared in glibc 2.3, but before glibc 2.3.3,
the implementation only supported interfaces with IPv4 addresses.
Support of interfaces without IPv4 addresses is only available
on kernels that support netlink.
.SH CONFORMING TO
RFC\ 3493, POSIX.1-2001.
.SH HISTORY
This function first appeared in BSDi.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR getsockopt (2),
.BR setsockopt (2),
.BR getifaddrs (3),
.BR if_indextoname (3),
.BR if_nameindex (3),
.BR if_nametoindex (3),
.BR ifconfig (8)
