.\" Copyright 2000 Sam Varshavchik <mrsam@courier-mta.com>
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References: RFC 2553
.TH inet_pton 3  2000-12-18 "Linux Man Page" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
inet_pton \- Create a network address structure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/types.h>
.B #include <sys/socket.h>
.B #include <arpa/inet.h>
.sp
.BI "int inet_pton(int " "af" ", const char *" "src" ", void *" "dst" );
.SH DESCRIPTION
This function converts the character string
.I src
into a network address structure in the
.I af
address family, then
copies
the network address structure to
.IR dst .
.PP
.BR inet_pton (3)
extends the
.BR inet_addr (3)
function to support multiple address families,
.BR inet_addr (3)
is now considered to be deprecated in favor of
.BR inet_pton (3).
The following address families are currently supported:
.TP
.B AF_INET
.I src
points to a character string containing an IPv4 network address in
the dotted-quad format, "\fIddd.ddd.ddd.ddd\fP".
The address is converted
to a
.I struct in_addr
and copied to
.IR dst,
which must be
.I sizeof(struct in_addr)
bytes long.
.TP
.B AF_INET6
.I src
points to a character string containing an IPv6 network address in
any allowed IPv6 address format.
The address is converted
to a
.I struct in6_addr
and copied to
.IR dst,
which must be
.I sizeof(struct in6_addr)
bytes long.
.PP
Certain legacy hex and octal formats of
.B AF_INET
addresses are not supported by
.IR inet_pton ,
which rejects them.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
.B inet_pton
returns a negative value and sets
.I errno
to
.B EAFNOSUPPORT
if
.I af
does not contain a valid address family.
0 is returned if
.I src
does not contain a character string representing a valid network
address in the specified address family.
A positive value is returned if the network address was successfully
converted.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR inet_ntop (3)
.SH BUGS
.B AF_INET6
does not recognize IPv4 addresses.
An explicit IPv6-mapped IPv4 address must be supplied in
.I src
instead.
