.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_ONEPARA)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH ISWALNUM 3  2014-01-28 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
iswalnum \- test for alphanumeric wide character
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswalnum(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR iswalnum ()
function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.BR isalnum (3)
function.
It tests whether
.I wc
is a wide character
belonging to the wide-character class "alnum".
.PP
The wide-character class "alnum" is a subclass of the wide-character class
"graph", and therefore also a subclass of the wide-character class "print".
.PP
Being a subclass of the wide-character class "print",
the wide-character class
"alnum" is disjoint from the wide-character class "cntrl".
.PP
Being a subclass of the wide-character class "graph",
the wide-character class "alnum" is disjoint from
the wide-character class "space" and its subclass "blank".
.PP
The wide-character class "alnum" is disjoint from the wide-character class
"punct".
.PP
The wide-character class "alnum" is the union of the wide-character classes
"alpha" and "digit".
As such, it also contains the wide-character class
"xdigit".
.PP
The wide-character class "alnum" always contains at least the letters \(aqA\(aq
to \(aqZ\(aq, \(aqa\(aq to \(aqz\(aq and the digits \(aq0\(aq to \(aq9\(aq.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR iswalnum ()
function returns nonzero
if
.I wc
is a wide character
belonging to the wide-character class "alnum".
Otherwise it returns zero.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
.SS Multithreading (see pthreads(7))
The
.BR iswalnum ()
function is thread-safe with exceptions.
It can be safely used in multithreaded applications, as long as
.BR setlocale (3)
is not called to change the locale during its execution.
.SH CONFORMING TO
C99.
.SH NOTES
The behavior of
.BR iswalnum ()
depends on the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the
current locale.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR isalnum (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
