.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH ISWPUNCT 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
iswpunct \- test for punctuation or symbolic wide character
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "int iswpunct(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBiswpunct\fP function is the wide-character equivalent of the
\fBispunct\fP function. It tests whether \fIwc\fP is a wide character
belonging to the wide character class "punct".
.PP
The wide character class "punct" is a subclass of the wide character class
"graph", and therefore also a subclass of the wide character class "print".
.PP
The wide character class "punct" is disjoint from the wide character class
"alnum" and therefore also disjoint from its subclasses "alpha", "upper",
"lower", "digit", "xdigit".
.PP
Being a subclass of the wide character class "print", the wide character class
"punct" is disjoint from the wide character class "cntrl".
.PP
Being a subclass of the wide character class "graph", the wide character class
"punct" is disjoint from the wide character class "space" and its subclass
"blank".
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBiswpunct\fP function returns non-zero if \fIwc\fP is a wide character
belonging to the wide character class "punct". Otherwise it returns zero.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
ISO/ANSI C, UNIX98
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ispunct (3),
.BR iswctype (3)
.SH NOTES
The behaviour of \fBiswpunct\fP depends on the LC_CTYPE category of the
current locale.
.PP
This function's name is a misnomer when dealing with Unicode characters,
because the wide character class "punct" contains both punctuation characters
and symbol (math, currency, etc.) characters.
