.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:08:17 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-08-25, aeb
.\" Modified 2004-11-12 as per suggestion by Fabian Kreutz/AEB
.\"
.TH J0 3  2007-07-26 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
j0, j0f, j0l, j1, j1f, j1l, jn, jnf, jnl,
y0, y0f, y0l, y1, y1f, y1l, yn, ynf, ynl \- Bessel functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double j0(double " x );
.br
.BI "double j1(double " x );
.br
.BI "double jn(int " n ", double " x );
.br
.BI "double y0(double " x );
.br
.BI "double y1(double " x );
.br
.BI "double yn(int " n ", double " x );
.sp
.BI "float j0f(float " x );
.br
.BI "float j1f(float " x );
.br
.BI "float jnf(int " n ", float " x );
.br
.BI "float y0f(float " x );
.br
.BI "float y1f(float " x );
.br
.BI "float ynf(int " n ", float " x );
.sp
.BI "long double j0l(long double " x );
.br
.BI "long double j1l(long double " x );
.br
.BI "long double jnl(int " n ", long double " x );
.br
.BI "long double y0l(long double " x );
.br
.BI "long double y1l(long double " x );
.br
.BI "long double ynl(int " n ", long double " x );
.fi
.sp
Link with \fI-lm\fP.
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.sp
.ad l
For all of these functions:
_SVID_SOURCE || _BSD_SOURCE || _XOPEN_SOURCE
.ad b
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR j0 ()
and
.BR j1 ()
functions return Bessel functions of \fIx\fP
of the first kind of orders 0 and 1, respectively.
The
.BR jn ()
function
returns the Bessel function of \fIx\fP of the first kind of order \fIn\fP.
.PP
The
.BR y0 ()
and
.BR y1 ()
functions return Bessel functions of \fIx\fP
of the second kind of orders 0 and 1, respectively.
The
.BR yn ()
function
returns the Bessel function of \fIx\fP of the second kind of order \fIn\fP.
.PP
For the functions
.BR y0 (),
.BR y1 ()
and
.BR yn (),
the value of \fIx\fP
must be positive.
For negative values of \fIx\fP, these functions return
\-\fBHUGE_VAL\fP.
.PP
The
.BR j0f ()
etc. and
.BR j0l ()
etc. functions are versions that take
and return
.I float
and
.I "long double"
values, respectively.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The functions returning
.I double
conform to SVr4, 4.3BSD,
POSIX.1-2001.
.SH BUGS
There are errors of up to 2e\-16 in the values returned by
.BR j0 (),
.BR j1 ()
and
.BR jn ()
for values of \fIx\fP between \-8 and 8.
