'\" t
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 by Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH MALLOC_TRIM 3  2017-09-15 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
malloc_trim \- release free memory from the heap
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <malloc.h>
.PP
.BI "int malloc_trim(size_t "  pad );
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR malloc_trim ()
function attempts to release free memory from the heap
(by calling
.BR sbrk (2)
or
.BR madvise (2)
with suitable arguments).
.PP
The
.I pad
argument specifies the amount of free space to leave untrimmed
at the top of the heap.
If this argument is 0, only the minimum amount of memory is maintained
at the top of the heap (i.e., one page or less).
A nonzero argument can be used to maintain some trailing space
at the top of the heap in order to allow future allocations
to be made without having to extend the heap with
.BR sbrk (2).
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR malloc_trim ()
function returns 1 if memory was actually released back to the system,
or 0 if it was not possible to release any memory.
.SH ERRORS
No errors are defined.
.\" .SH VERSIONS
.\" Available already in glibc 2.0, possibly earlier
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR malloc_trim ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
This function is a GNU extension.
.SH NOTES
This function is automatically called by
.BR free (3)
in certain circumstances; see the discussion of
.B M_TOP_PAD
and
.B M_TRIM_THRESHOLD
in
.BR mallopt (3).
.PP
Only the main heap (using
.BR sbrk (2))
honors the
.I pad
argument; thread heaps do not.
.PP
Since glibc 2.8 this function frees memory in all arenas and in all
chunks with whole free pages.
.\" See commit 68631c8eb92ff38d9da1ae34f6aa048539b199cc
.\" (dated 2007-12-16) which adds iteration over all
.\" arenas and frees all pages in chunks which are free.
.PP
Before glibc 2.8 this function only freed memory at the
top of the heap in the main arena.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sbrk (2),
.BR malloc (3),
.BR mallopt (3)
