.\" Copyright (c) 1993 by Thomas Koenig (ig25@rz.uni-karlsruhe.de)
.\" and Copyright i2007, 2012, 2018, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 19:00:59 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Clarification concerning realloc, iwj10@cus.cam.ac.uk (Ian Jackson), 950701
.\" Documented MALLOC_CHECK_, Wolfram Gloger (wmglo@dent.med.uni-muenchen.de)
.\" 2007-09-15 mtk: added notes on malloc()'s use of sbrk() and mmap().
.\"
.\" FIXME . Review http://austingroupbugs.net/view.php?id=374
.\" to see what changes are required on this page.
.\"
.TH MALLOC 3  2021-03-22 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
malloc, free, calloc, realloc, reallocarray \- allocate and free dynamic memory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.PP
.BI "void *malloc(size_t " "size" );
.BI "void free(void " "*ptr" );
.BI "void *calloc(size_t " "nmemb" ", size_t " "size" );
.BI "void *realloc(void " "*ptr" ", size_t "  "size" );
.BI "void *reallocarray(void " "*ptr" ", size_t " nmemb ", size_t "  "size" );
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR reallocarray ():
.nf
    Since glibc 2.29:
        _DEFAULT_SOURCE
    Glibc 2.28 and earlier:
        _GNU_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS malloc()
The
.BR malloc ()
function allocates
.I size
bytes and returns a pointer to the allocated memory.
.IR "The memory is not initialized" .
If
.I size
is 0, then
.BR malloc ()
returns a unique pointer value that can later be successfully passed to
.BR free ().
(See "Nonportable behavior" for portability issues.)
.SS free()
The
.BR free ()
function frees the memory space pointed to by
.IR ptr ,
which must have been returned by a previous call to
.BR malloc ()
or related functions.
Otherwise, or if
.I ptr
has already been freed, undefined behavior occurs.
If
.I ptr
is NULL, no operation is performed.
.SS calloc()
The
.BR calloc ()
function allocates memory for an array of
.I nmemb
elements of
.I size
bytes each and returns a pointer to the allocated memory.
The memory is set to zero.
If
.I nmemb
or
.I size
is 0, then
.BR calloc ()
returns a unique pointer value that can later be successfully passed to
.BR free ().
.PP
If the multiplication of
.I nmemb
and
.I size
would result in integer overflow, then
.BR calloc ()
returns an error.
By contrast,
an integer overflow would not be detected in the following call to
.BR malloc (),
with the result that an incorrectly sized block of memory would be allocated:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
malloc(nmemb * size);
.EE
.in
.SS realloc()
The
.BR realloc ()
function changes the size of the memory block pointed to by
.I ptr
to
.I size
bytes.
The contents of the memory
will be unchanged in the range from the start of the region
up to the minimum of the old and new sizes.
If the new size is larger than the old size, the added memory will
.I not
be initialized.
.PP
If
.I ptr
is NULL, then the call is equivalent to
.IR malloc(size) ,
for all values of
.IR size .
.PP
If
.I size
is equal to zero,
and
.I ptr
is not NULL, then the call is equivalent to
.I free(ptr)
(but see "Nonportable behavior" for portability issues).
.PP
Unless
.I ptr
is NULL, it must have been returned by an earlier call to
.B malloc
or related functions.
If the area pointed to was moved, a
.I free(ptr)
is done.
.SS reallocarray()
The
.BR reallocarray ()
function changes the size of the memory block pointed to by
.I ptr
to be large enough for an array of
.I nmemb
elements, each of which is
.I size
bytes.
It is equivalent to the call
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
realloc(ptr, nmemb * size);
.EE
.in
.PP
However, unlike that
.BR realloc ()
call,
.BR reallocarray ()
fails safely in the case where the multiplication would overflow.
If such an overflow occurs,
.BR reallocarray ()
returns an error.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR malloc (),
.BR calloc (),
.BR realloc (),
and
.BR reallocarray ()
functions return a pointer to the allocated memory,
which is suitably aligned for any type that fits into
the requested size or less.
On error, these functions return NULL and set
.IR errno .
Attempting to allocate more than
.B PTRDIFF_MAX
bytes is considered an error, as an object that large
could cause later pointer subtraction to overflow.
.PP
The
.BR free ()
function returns no value, and preserves
.IR errno .
.PP
The
.BR realloc ()
and
.BR reallocarray ()
functions return NULL if
.I ptr
is not NULL and the requested size is zero;
this is not considered an error.
(See "Nonportable behavior" for portability issues.)
Otherwise, the returned pointer may be the same as
.IR ptr
if the allocation was not moved
(e.g., there was room to expand the allocation in-place), or different from
.IR ptr
if the allocation was moved to a new address.
If these functions fail,
the original block is left untouched; it is not freed or moved.
.SH ERRORS
.BR calloc (),
.BR malloc (),
.BR realloc (),
and
.BR reallocarray ()
can fail with the following error:
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Out of memory.
Possibly, the application hit the
.BR RLIMIT_AS
or
.BR RLIMIT_DATA
limit described in
.BR getrlimit (2).
.SH VERSIONS
.BR reallocarray ()
first appeared in glibc in version 2.26.
.PP
.BR malloc ()
and related functions rejected sizes greater than
.B PTRDIFF_MAX
starting in glibc 2.30.
.PP
.BR free ()
preserved
.I errno
starting in glibc 2.33.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.ad l
.nh
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR malloc (),
.BR free (),
.BR calloc (),
.BR realloc ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.hy
.ad
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR malloc (),
.BR free (),
.BR calloc (),
.BR realloc ():
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008, C89, C99.
.PP
.BR reallocarray ()
is a nonstandard extension that first appeared in OpenBSD 5.6 and FreeBSD 11.0.
.SH NOTES
By default, Linux follows an optimistic memory allocation strategy.
This means that when
.BR malloc ()
returns non-NULL there is no guarantee that the memory really
is available.
In case it turns out that the system is out of memory,
one or more processes will be killed by the OOM killer.
For more information, see the description of
.IR /proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory
and
.IR /proc/sys/vm/oom_adj
in
.BR proc (5),
and the Linux kernel source file
.IR Documentation/vm/overcommit\-accounting.rst .
.PP
Normally,
.BR malloc ()
allocates memory from the heap, and adjusts the size of the heap
as required, using
.BR sbrk (2).
When allocating blocks of memory larger than
.B MMAP_THRESHOLD
bytes, the glibc
.BR malloc ()
implementation allocates the memory as a private anonymous mapping using
.BR mmap (2).
.B MMAP_THRESHOLD
is 128\ kB by default, but is adjustable using
.BR mallopt (3).
Prior to Linux 4.7
allocations performed using
.BR mmap (2)
were unaffected by the
.B RLIMIT_DATA
resource limit;
since Linux 4.7, this limit is also enforced for allocations performed using
.BR mmap (2).
.PP
To avoid corruption in multithreaded applications,
mutexes are used internally to protect the memory-management
data structures employed by these functions.
In a multithreaded application in which threads simultaneously
allocate and free memory,
there could be contention for these mutexes.
To scalably handle memory allocation in multithreaded applications,
glibc creates additional
.IR "memory allocation arenas"
if mutex contention is detected.
Each arena is a large region of memory that is internally allocated
by the system
(using
.BR brk (2)
or
.BR mmap (2)),
and managed with its own mutexes.
.PP
If your program uses a private memory allocator,
it should do so by replacing
.BR malloc (),
.BR free (),
.BR calloc (),
and
.BR realloc ().
The replacement functions must implement the documented glibc behaviors,
including
.I errno
handling, size-zero allocations, and overflow checking;
otherwise, other library routines may crash or operate incorrectly.
For example, if the replacement
.IR free ()
does not preserve errno, then seemingly unrelated library routines may
fail without having a valid reason in
.IR errno .
Private memory allocators may also need to replace other glibc functions;
see "Replacing malloc" in the glibc manual for details.
.PP
Crashes in memory allocators
are almost always related to heap corruption, such as overflowing
an allocated chunk or freeing the same pointer twice.
.PP
The
.BR malloc ()
implementation is tunable via environment variables; see
.BR mallopt (3)
for details.
.SS Nonportable behavior
The behavior of
these functions when the requested size is zero
is glibc specific;
other implementations may return NULL without setting
.IR errno ,
and portable POSIX programs should tolerate such behavior.
See
.BR realloc (3p).
.PP
POSIX requires memory allocators
to set
.I errno
upon failure.
However, the C standard does not require this, and applications
portable to non-POSIX platforms should not assume this.
.PP
Portable programs should not use private memory allocators,
as POSIX and the C standard do not allow replacement of
.BR malloc (),
.BR free (),
.BR calloc (),
and
.BR realloc ().
.SH SEE ALSO
.\" http://g.oswego.edu/dl/html/malloc.html
.\" A Memory Allocator - by Doug Lea
.\"
.\" http://www.bozemanpass.com/info/linux/malloc/Linux_Heap_Contention.html
.\" Linux Heap, Contention in free() - David Boreham
.\"
.\" http://www.citi.umich.edu/projects/linux-scalability/reports/malloc.html
.\" malloc() Performance in a Multithreaded Linux Environment -
.\"     Check Lever, David Boreham
.\"
.ad l
.nh
.BR valgrind (1),
.BR brk (2),
.BR mmap (2),
.BR alloca (3),
.BR malloc_get_state (3),
.BR malloc_info (3),
.BR malloc_trim (3),
.BR malloc_usable_size (3),
.BR mallopt (3),
.BR mcheck (3),
.BR mtrace (3),
.BR posix_memalign (3)
.PP
For details of the GNU C library implementation, see
.UR https://sourceware.org/glibc/wiki/MallocInternals
.UE .
