.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH POW10 3  2017-09-15 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pow10, pow10f, pow10l \- base-10 power functions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.BR "#define _GNU_SOURCE" "         /* See feature_test_macros(7) */"
.B #include <math.h>
.PP
.BI "double pow10(double " x );
.BI "float pow10f(float " x );
.BI "long double pow10l(long double " x );
.fi
.PP
Link with \fI\-lm\fP.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions return the value of 10 raised to the power
.IR x .
.PP
.BR "Note well" :
These functions perform exactly the same task as the functions described in
.BR exp10 (3),
with the difference that the latter functions are now standardized
in TS\ 18661-4:2015.
Those latter functions should be used in preference
to the functions described in this page.
.SH VERSIONS
These functions first appeared in glibc in version 2.1.
Since glibc 2.27,
.\" glibc commit 5a80d39d0d2587e9bd8e72f19e92eeb2a66fbe9e
the use of these functions in new programs is no longer supported.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.TS
allbox;
lbw28 lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR pow10 (),
.BR pow10f (),
.BR pow10l ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
.TE
.SH CONFORMING TO
This functions are nonstandard GNU extensions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR exp10 (3),
.BR pow (3)
