.\" Copyright (c) 2017, Michael Kerrisk <mtk.manpages@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH PTHREAD_MUTEXATTR_INIT 3 2017-08-20 "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pthread_mutexattr_init, pthread_mutexattr_destroy \- initialize and
destroy a mutex attributes object
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <pthread.h>
.PP
.BI "int pthread_mutexattr_init(pthread_mutexattr_t *" attr ");"
.BI "int pthread_mutexattr_destroy(pthread_mutexattr_t *" attr ");"
.fi
.PP
Compile and link with \fI\-pthread\fP.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR pthread_mutexattr_init ()
function initializes the mutex attributes object pointed to by
.I attr
with default values for all attributes defined by the implementation.
.PP
The results of initializing an already initialized mutex attributes
object are undefined.
.PP
The
.BR pthread_mutexattr_destroy ()
function destroys a mutex attribute object (making it uninitialized).
Once a mutex attributes object has been destroyed, it can be reinitialized with
.BR pthread_mutexattr_init ().
.PP
The results of destroying an uninitialized mutex attributes
object are undefined.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On success, these functions return 0.
On error, they return a positive error number.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX.1-2001, POSIX.1-2008.
.SH NOTES
Subsequent changes to a mutex attributes object do not affect mutex that
have already been initialized using that object.
.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
.nh
.BR pthread_mutex_init (3),
.BR pthread_mutexattr_getrobust (3),
.BR pthread_mutexattr_getpshared (3),
.BR pthreads (7)
