.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\"
.\" Modified 1993-07-24 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified 2002-08-10 Walter Harms (walter.harms@informatik.uni-oldenburg.de)
.\" Modified 2003-11-18, 2004-10-05 aeb
.\"
.TH REMAINDER 3  2003-11-18 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
drem, dremf, dreml, remainder, remainderf, remainderl \- floating-point remainder function
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
/* The C99 versions */
.BI "double remainder(double " x ", double " y );
.BI "float remainderf(float " x ", float " y );
.BI "long double remainderl(long double " x ", long double " y );
.sp
/* Obsolete synonyms */
.BI "double drem(double " x ", double " y );
.BI "float dremf(float " x ", float " y );
.BI "long double dreml(long double " x ", long double " y );
.sp
.fi
Link with \-lm.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B remainder()
function computes the remainder of dividing
.I x
by
.IR y .
The return value is
.IR x " - " n " * " y ,
where
.I n
is the value
.IR x " / " y ,
rounded to the nearest integer.
If this quotient is 1/2 (mod 1), it is rounded to the nearest even number
(independent of the current rounding mode).
If the return value is 0, it has the sign of
.IR x .
.LP
The
.B drem()
function does precisely the same thing.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.B remainder()
function returns the remainder, unless
.I y
is zero, when the function fails and
.I errno
is set.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EDOM
The denominator
.I y
is zero.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
IEC 60559. The three
.B remainder*()
functions are from C99.
The function
.B drem()
is from BSD 4.3. The float and long double variants
.B dremf()
and
.B dreml()
exist on some systems, such as Tru64 and glibc2.
.SH EXAMPLE
The call "remainder(29.0, 3.0)" returns \-1.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fmod (3)
