.\" Copyright 2004 Andries Brouwer <aeb@cwi.nl>.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.TH SCALB 3 2004-10-31 "" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
scalb, scalbf, scalbl, scalbn, scalbnf, scalbnl, scalbln, scalblnf, scalblnl \-
multiply floating-point number by integral power of radix
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <math.h>
.sp
.BI "double scalb(double " x ", double " exp );
.br
.BI "float scalbf(float " x ", double " exp );
.br
.BI "long double scalbl(long double " x ", double " exp );
.sp
.BI "double scalbn(double " x ", int " exp );
.br
.BI "float scalbnf(float " x ", int " exp );
.br
.BI "long double scalbnl(long double " x ", int " exp );
.sp
.BI "double scalbln(double " x ", long int " exp );
.br
.BI "float scalblnf(float " x ", long int " exp );
.br
.BI "long double scalblnl(long double " x ", long int " exp );
.sp
Link with -lm.
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions multiply their first argument
.I x
by FLT_RADIX (probably 2) to the power
.IR exp .

If FLT_RADIX equals 2, then
.B scalbn()
is equivalent to
.BR ldexp() .

The value of FLT_RADIX is found in
.I <float.h>.
.\" not in /usr/include but in a gcc lib
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
The
.B scalb()
function is from BSD 4.3.
The
.B scalbn()
and
.B scalbln()
functions are from C99.
All three are in POSIX 1003.1-2003. The
.B scalb()
function is marked obsolescent.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ldexp (3)
