.\" Copyright (C) 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(VERBATIM)
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\"
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sat Jul 24 18:26:16 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Modified Thu Apr 11 17:11:33 1996 by Andries Brouwer (aeb@cwi.nl):
.\"     Corrected type of compar routines, as suggested by
.\"     Miguel Barreiro (enano@avalon.yaix.es).  Added example.
.\" Modified Sun Sep 24 20:15:46 2000 by aeb, following Petter Reinholdtsen.
.\" Modified 2001-12-26 by aeb, following Joey. Added versionsort.
.\"
.\" The pieces on scandirat(3) were copyright and licensed as follows.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2012, Mark R. Bannister <cambridge@users.sourceforge.net>
.\"        based on text in mkfifoat.3 Copyright (c) 2006, Michael Kerrisk
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, see
.\" <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.TH SCANDIR 3  2021-08-27 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
scandir, scandirat, alphasort, versionsort \- scan
a directory for matching entries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <dirent.h>
.PP
.BI "int scandir(const char *restrict " dirp ,
.BI "            struct dirent ***restrict " namelist ,
.BI "            int (*" filter ")(const struct dirent *),"
.BI "            int (*" compar ")(const struct dirent **,"
.BR "                          const struct dirent **));"
.PP
.BI "int alphasort(const struct dirent **" a ", const struct dirent **" b );
.BI "int versionsort(const struct dirent **" a ", const struct dirent **" b );
.PP
.BR "#include <fcntl.h>" "          /* Definition of AT_* constants */"
.B #include <dirent.h>
.PP
.BI "int scandirat(int " dirfd ", const char *restrict " dirp ,
.BI "            struct dirent ***restrict " namelist ,
.BI "            int (*" filter ")(const struct dirent *),"
.BI "            int (*" compar ")(const struct dirent **,"
.BI "                          const struct dirent **));"
.fi
.PP
.RS -4
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.RE
.PP
.BR scandir (),
.BR alphasort ():
.nf
    /* Since glibc 2.10: */ _POSIX_C_SOURCE >= 200809L
        || /* Glibc <= 2.19: */ _BSD_SOURCE || _SVID_SOURCE
.fi
.PP
.BR versionsort ():
.nf
    _GNU_SOURCE
.fi
.PP
.BR scandirat ():
.nf
    _GNU_SOURCE
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR scandir ()
function scans the directory \fIdirp\fP, calling
\fIfilter\fP() on each directory entry.
Entries for which
\fIfilter\fP() returns nonzero are stored in strings allocated via
.BR malloc (3),
sorted using
.BR qsort (3)
with the comparison
function \fIcompar\fP(), and collected in array \fInamelist\fP
which is allocated via
.BR malloc (3).
If \fIfilter\fP is NULL, all entries are selected.
.PP
The
.BR alphasort ()
and
.BR versionsort ()
functions can be used as the comparison function
.IR compar ().
The former sorts directory entries using
.BR strcoll (3),
the latter using
.BR strverscmp (3)
on the strings \fI(*a)\->d_name\fP and \fI(*b)\->d_name\fP.
.SS scandirat()
The
.BR scandirat ()
function operates in exactly the same way as
.BR scandir (),
except for the differences described here.
.PP
If the pathname given in
.I dirp
is relative, then it is interpreted relative to the directory
referred to by the file descriptor
.I dirfd
(rather than relative to the current working directory of
the calling process, as is done by
.BR scandir ()
for a relative pathname).
.PP
If
.I dirp
is relative and
.I dirfd
is the special value
.BR AT_FDCWD ,
then
.I dirp
is interpreted relative to the current working
directory of the calling process (like
.BR scandir ()).
.PP
If
.I dirp
is absolute, then
.I dirfd
is ignored.
.PP
See
.BR openat (2)
for an explanation of the need for
.BR scandirat ().
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR scandir ()
function returns the number of directory entries
selected.
On error, \-1 is returned, with
.I errno
set to indicate the error.
.PP
The
.BR alphasort ()
and
.BR versionsort ()
functions return an integer less than, equal to,
or greater than zero if the first argument is considered to be
respectively less than, equal to, or greater than the second.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EBADF
.RB ( scandirat ())
.I dirp
is relative but
.I dirfd
is neither
.B AT_FDCWD
nor a valid file descriptor.
.TP
.B ENOENT
The path in \fIdirp\fR does not exist.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
Insufficient memory to complete the operation.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
The path in \fIdirp\fR is not a directory.
.TP
.B ENOTDIR
.RB ( scandirat ())
.I dirp
is a relative pathname and
.I dirfd
is a file descriptor referring to a file other than a directory.
.SH VERSIONS
.BR versionsort ()
was added to glibc in version 2.1.
.PP
.BR scandirat ()
was added to glibc in version 2.15.
.SH ATTRIBUTES
For an explanation of the terms used in this section, see
.BR attributes (7).
.ad l
.nh
.TS
allbox;
lbx lb lb
l l l.
Interface	Attribute	Value
T{
.BR scandir (),
.BR scandirat ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe
T{
.BR alphasort (),
.BR versionsort ()
T}	Thread safety	MT-Safe locale
.TE
.hy
.ad
.sp 1
.SH CONFORMING TO
.BR alphasort (),
.BR scandir ():
4.3BSD, POSIX.1-2008.
.PP
.BR versionsort ()
and
.BR scandirat ()
are GNU extensions.
.\" .LP
.\" The functions
.\" .BR scandir ()
.\" and
.\" .BR alphasort ()
.\" are from 4.3BSD, and have been available under Linux since libc4.
.\" Libc4 and libc5 use the more precise prototype
.\" .sp
.\" .nf
.\"    int alphasort(const struct dirent ** a,
.\"                  const struct dirent **b);
.\" .fi
.\" .sp
.\" but glibc 2.0 returns to the imprecise BSD prototype.
.SH NOTES
Since glibc 2.1,
.BR alphasort ()
calls
.BR strcoll (3);
earlier it used
.BR strcmp (3).
.PP
Before glibc 2.10, the two arguments of
.BR alphasort ()
and
.BR versionsort ()
were typed as
.IR "const void\ *" .
When
.BR alphasort ()
was standardized in POSIX.1-2008,
the argument type was specified as the type-safe
.IR "const struct dirent\ **",
and glibc 2.10 changed the definition of
.BR alphasort ()
(and the nonstandard
.BR versionsort ())
to match the standard.
.SH EXAMPLES
The program below prints a list of the files in the current directory
in reverse order.
.\"
.SS Program source
\&
.EX
#define _DEFAULT_SOURCE
#include <dirent.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

int
main(void)
{
    struct dirent **namelist;
    int n;

    n = scandir(".", &namelist, NULL, alphasort);
    if (n == \-1) {
        perror("scandir");
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }

    while (n\-\-) {
        printf("%s\en", namelist[n]\->d_name);
        free(namelist[n]);
    }
    free(namelist);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR closedir (3),
.BR fnmatch (3),
.BR opendir (3),
.BR readdir (3),
.BR rewinddir (3),
.BR seekdir (3),
.BR strcmp (3),
.BR strcoll (3),
.BR strverscmp (3),
.BR telldir (3)
