.\" Copyright (c) 1993
.\"    The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" and Copyright (c) 2020 by Alejandro Colomar <colomar.6.4.3@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(BSD_3_CLAUSE_UCB)
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\"
.TH SLIST 3 2020-10-21 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
SLIST_EMPTY,
SLIST_ENTRY,
SLIST_FIRST,
SLIST_FOREACH,
.\"SLIST_FOREACH_FROM,
.\"SLIST_FOREACH_FROM_SAFE,
.\"SLIST_FOREACH_SAFE,
SLIST_HEAD,
SLIST_HEAD_INITIALIZER,
SLIST_INIT,
SLIST_INSERT_AFTER,
SLIST_INSERT_HEAD,
SLIST_NEXT,
SLIST_REMOVE,
.\"SLIST_REMOVE_AFTER,
SLIST_REMOVE_HEAD
.\"SLIST_SWAP
\- implementation of a singly linked list
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <sys/queue.h>
.PP
.BI "int SLIST_EMPTY(SLIST_HEAD *" head ");"
.PP
.B SLIST_ENTRY(TYPE);
.PP
.BI "struct TYPE *SLIST_FIRST(SLIST_HEAD *" head ");"
.PP
.BI "SLIST_FOREACH(struct TYPE *" var ", SLIST_HEAD *" head ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.\".PP
.\".BI "SLIST_FOREACH_FROM(struct TYPE *" var ", SLIST_HEAD *" head ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.\".PP
.\".BI "SLIST_FOREACH_FROM_SAFE(struct TYPE *" var ", SLIST_HEAD *" head ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ", struct TYPE *" temp_var ");"
.\".PP
.\".BI "SLIST_FOREACH_SAFE(struct TYPE *" var ", SLIST_HEAD *" head ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ", struct TYPE *" temp_var ");"
.PP
.B SLIST_HEAD(HEADNAME, TYPE);
.PP
.BI "SLIST_HEAD SLIST_HEAD_INITIALIZER(SLIST_HEAD " head ");"
.PP
.BI "void SLIST_INIT(SLIST_HEAD *" head ");"
.PP
.BI "void SLIST_INSERT_AFTER(struct TYPE *" listelm ", struct TYPE *" elm ","
.BI "                SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.PP
.BI "void SLIST_INSERT_HEAD(SLIST_HEAD *" head ", struct TYPE *" elm ","
.BI "                SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.PP
.BI "struct TYPE *SLIST_NEXT(struct TYPE *" elm ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.PP
.BI "void SLIST_REMOVE(SLIST_HEAD *" head ", struct TYPE *" elm ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.\".PP
.\".BI "void SLIST_REMOVE_AFTER(struct TYPE *" elm ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.PP
.BI "void SLIST_REMOVE_HEAD(SLIST_HEAD *" head ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.\".PP
.\".BI "void SLIST_SWAP(SLIST_HEAD *" head1 ", SLIST_HEAD *" head2 ", SLIST_ENTRY " NAME ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These macros define and operate on doubly linked lists.
.PP
In the macro definitions,
.I TYPE
is the name of a user-defined structure,
that must contain a field of type
.IR SLIST_ENTRY ,
named
.IR NAME .
The argument
.IR HEADNAME
is the name of a user-defined structure that must be declared
using the macro
.BR SLIST_HEAD ().
.PP
A singly linked list is headed by a structure defined by the
.BR SLIST_HEAD ()
macro.
This structure contains a single pointer to the first element
on the list.
The elements are singly linked for minimum space and pointer manipulation
overhead at the expense of O(n) removal for arbitrary elements.
New elements can be added to the list after an existing element or
at the head of the list.
An
.I SLIST_HEAD
structure is declared as follows:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
SLIST_HEAD(HEADNAME, TYPE) head;
.EE
.in
.PP
where
.I struct HEADNAME
is the structure to be defined, and
.I struct TYPE
is the type of the elements to be linked into the list.
A pointer to the head of the list can later be declared as:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
struct HEADNAME *headp;
.EE
.in
.PP
(The names
.I head
and
.I headp
are user selectable.)
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_HEAD_INITIALIZER ()
evaluates to an initializer for the list
.IR head .
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_EMPTY ()
evaluates to true if there are no elements in the list.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_ENTRY ()
declares a structure that connects the elements in
the list.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_FIRST ()
returns the first element in the list or NULL if the list is empty.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_FOREACH ()
traverses the list referenced by
.I head
in the forward direction, assigning each element in
turn to
.IR var .
.\" .PP
.\" The macro
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH_FROM ()
.\" behaves identically to
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH ()
.\" when
.\" .I var
.\" is NULL, else it treats
.\" .I var
.\" as a previously found SLIST element and begins the loop at
.\" .I var
.\" instead of the first element in the SLIST referenced by
.\" .IR head .
.\" .Pp
.\" The macro
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH_SAFE ()
.\" traverses the list referenced by
.\" .I head
.\" in the forward direction, assigning each element in
.\" turn to
.\" .IR var .
.\" However, unlike
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH ()
.\" here it is permitted to both remove
.\" .I var
.\" as well as free it from within the loop safely without interfering with the
.\" traversal.
.\" .PP
.\" The macro
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH_FROM_SAFE ()
.\" behaves identically to
.\" .BR SLIST_FOREACH_SAFE ()
.\" when
.\" .I var
.\" is NULL, else it treats
.\" .I var
.\" as a previously found SLIST element and begins the loop at
.\" .I var
.\" instead of the first element in the SLIST referenced by
.\" .IR head .
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_INIT ()
initializes the list referenced by
.IR head .
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_INSERT_HEAD ()
inserts the new element
.I elm
at the head of the list.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_INSERT_AFTER ()
inserts the new element
.I elm
after the element
.IR listelm .
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_NEXT ()
returns the next element in the list.
.\" .PP
.\" The macro
.\" .BR SLIST_REMOVE_AFTER ()
.\" removes the element after
.\" .I elm
.\" from the list.
.\" Unlike
.\" .IR SLIST_REMOVE ,
.\" this macro does not traverse the entire list.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_REMOVE_HEAD ()
removes the element
.I elm
from the head of the list.
For optimum efficiency,
elements being removed from the head of the list should explicitly use
this macro instead of the generic
.I SLIST_REMOVE
macro.
.PP
The macro
.BR SLIST_REMOVE ()
removes the element
.I elm
from the list.
.\" .PP
.\" The macro
.\" .BR SLIST_SWAP ()
.\" swaps the contents of
.\" .I head1
.\" and
.\" .IR head2 .
.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR SLIST_EMPTY ()
returns nonzero if the list is empty,
and zero if the list contains at least one entry.
.PP
.BR SLIST_FIRST (),
and
.BR SLIST_NEXT ()
return a pointer to the first or next
.I TYPE
structure, respectively.
.PP
.BR SLIST_HEAD_INITIALIZER ()
returns an initializer that can be assigned to the list
.IR head .
.SH CONFORMING TO
Not in POSIX.1, POSIX.1-2001 or POSIX.1-2008.
Present on the BSDs
(SLIST macros first appeared in 4.4BSD).
.SH BUGS
The macro
.BR SLIST_FOREACH ()
doesn't allow
.I var
to be removed or freed within the loop,
as it would interfere with the traversal.
The macro
.BR SLIST_FOREACH_SAFE (),
which is present on the BSDs but is not present in glibc,
fixes this limitation by allowing
.I var
to safely be removed from the list and freed from within the loop
without interfering with the traversal.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
#include <stddef.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <sys/queue.h>

struct entry {
    int data;
    SLIST_ENTRY(entry) entries;             /* Singly linked List. */
};

SLIST_HEAD(slisthead, entry);

int
main(void)
{
    struct entry *n1, *n2, *n3, *np;
    struct slisthead head;                  /* Singly linked List
                                               head. */

    SLIST_INIT(&head);                      /* Initialize the queue. */

    n1 = malloc(sizeof(struct entry));      /* Insert at the head. */
    SLIST_INSERT_HEAD(&head, n1, entries);

    n2 = malloc(sizeof(struct entry));      /* Insert after. */
    SLIST_INSERT_AFTER(n1, n2, entries);

    SLIST_REMOVE(&head, n2, entry, entries);/* Deletion. */
    free(n2);

    n3 = SLIST_FIRST(&head);
    SLIST_REMOVE_HEAD(&head, entries);      /* Deletion from the head. */
    free(n3);

    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        n1 = malloc(sizeof(struct entry));
        SLIST_INSERT_HEAD(&head, n1, entries);
        n1->data = i;
    }

                                            /* Forward traversal. */
    SLIST_FOREACH(np, &head, entries)
        printf("%i\en", np->data);

    while (!SLIST_EMPTY(&head)) {           /* List Deletion. */
        n1 = SLIST_FIRST(&head);
        SLIST_REMOVE_HEAD(&head, entries);
        free(n1);
    }
    SLIST_INIT(&head);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR insque (3),
.BR queue (7)
