.\" Copyright 1993 David Metcalfe (david@prism.demon.co.uk)
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
.\" manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
.\" entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\" 
.\" Since the Linux kernel and libraries are constantly changing, this
.\" manual page may be incorrect or out-of-date.  The author(s) assume no
.\" responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
.\" the use of the information contained herein.  The author(s) may not
.\" have taken the same level of care in the production of this manual,
.\" which is licensed free of charge, as they might when working
.\" professionally.
.\" 
.\" Formatted or processed versions of this manual, if unaccompanied by
.\" the source, must acknowledge the copyright and authors of this work.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     Linux libc source code
.\"     Lewine's _POSIX Programmer's Guide_ (O'Reilly & Associates, 1991)
.\"     386BSD man pages
.\" Modified Sun Jul 25 10:54:03 1993 by Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu)
.\" Fixed typo, aeb, 950823
.\" 2002-02-22, joey, mihtjel: Added strtoull()
.\"
.TH STRTOUL 3  2002-05-30 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
strtoul, strtoull, strtouq \- convert a string to an unsigned long integer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <stdlib.h>
.sp
.BI "unsigned long int"
.BI "strtoul(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr ", int " base );
.sp
.BI "unsigned long long int"
.BI "strtoull(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr ", int " base );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBstrtoul()\fP function converts the initial part of the string
in \fInptr\fP to an unsigned long integer value according to the
given \fIbase\fP, which must be between 2 and 36 inclusive, or be
the special value 0.
.PP
The string must begin with an arbitrary amount of white space (as
determined by
.BR isspace (3))
followed by a single optional `+' or `-'
sign.  If \fIbase\fP is zero or 16, the string may then include a 
`0x' prefix, and the number will be read in base 16; otherwise, a 
zero \fIbase\fP is taken as 10 (decimal) unless the next character
is `0', in which case it is taken as 8 (octal).
.PP
The remainder of the string is converted to an unsigned long int value
in the obvious manner, stopping at the first character which is not a 
valid digit in the given base.  (In bases above 10, the letter `A' in
either upper or lower case represents 10, `B' represents 11, and so
forth, with `Z' representing 35.)
.PP
If \fIendptr\fP is not NULL, \fBstrtoul()\fP stores the address of the
first invalid character in \fI*endptr\fP.  If there were no digits at
all, \fBstrtoul()\fP stores the original value of \fInptr\fP in
\fI*endptr\fP (and returns 0).
In particular, if \fI*nptr\fP is not `\\0' but \fI**endptr\fP
is `\\0' on return, the entire string is valid.
.PP
The
.B strtoull()
function works just like the
.B strtoul()
function but returns an unsigned long long integer value.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The \fBstrtoul()\fP function returns either the result of the conversion
or, if there was a leading minus sign, the negation of the result of the
conversion, unless the original (non-negated) value would overflow; in
the latter case, \fBstrtoul()\fP returns ULONG_MAX and sets the global
variable \fIerrno\fP to ERANGE.
Precisely the same holds for
.B strtoull()
(with ULLONG_MAX instead of ULONG_MAX).
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B EINVAL
(not in C99)
The given
.I base
contains an unsupported value.
.TP
.B ERANGE
The resulting value was out of range.
.LP
The implementation may also set \fIerrno\fP to \fBEINVAL\fP in case
no conversion was performed (no digits seen, and 0 returned).
.SH NOTES
In locales other than the "C" locale, also other strings may be accepted.
(For example, the thousands separator of the current locale may be
supported.)
.LP
BSD also has
.sp
.in +4n
.nf
.BI "u_quad_t"
.BI "strtouq(const char *" nptr ", char **" endptr ", int base" );
.sp
.in -4n
.fi
with completely analogous definition.
Depending on the wordsize of the current architecture, this
may be equivalent to
.B strtoull()
or to
.BR strtoul() .
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
.B strtoul()
conforms to SVID 3, BSD 4.3, ISO 9899 (C99) and POSIX, and
.BR strtoull()
to ISO 9899 (C99) and POSIX 1003.1-2001.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR atof (3),
.BR atoi (3),
.BR atol (3),
.BR strtod (3),
.BR strtol (3)
