.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_ONEPARA)
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single UNIX specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"   ISO/IEC 9899:1999
.\"
.TH TOWLOWER 3  1999-07-25 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
towlower \- convert a wide character to lowercase
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wctype.h>
.sp
.BI "wint_t towlower(wint_t " wc );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR towlower ()
function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.BR tolower (3)
function.
If
.I wc
is a wide character, it is converted to
lowercase.
Characters which do not have case are returned unchanged.
If
.IR wc
is
.BR WEOF ,
.B WEOF
is returned.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The
.BR towlower ()
function returns the lowercase equivalent of
.IR wc ,
or
.BR WEOF
if
.I wc
is
.BR WEOF .
.SH CONFORMING TO
C99.
.SH NOTES
The behavior of
.BR towlower ()
depends on the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the
current locale.
.PP
This function is not very appropriate for dealing with Unicode characters,
because Unicode knows about three cases: upper, lower and title case.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR iswlower (3),
.BR towctrans (3),
.BR towupper (3)
