.\" Copyright 1997 Nicolás Lichtmaier <nick@debian.org>
.\" Created Wed Jul  2 23:27:34 ART 1997
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" Added info on availability, aeb, 971207
.\" Added -lutil remark, 030718
.\" 2008-07-02, mtk, document updwtmpx()
.\"
.TH UPDWTMP 3  2008-07-02 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
updwtmp, logwtmp \- append an entry to the wtmp file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <utmp.h>
.sp
.BI "void updwtmp(const char *" wtmp_file ", const struct utmp *" ut );
.br
.BI "void logwtmp(const char *" line ", const char *" name \
", const char *" host );
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR updwtmp ()
appends the utmp structure
.I ut
to the wtmp file.
.PP
.BR logwtmp ()
constructs a utmp structure using
.IR line ", " name ", " host ,
current time and current process ID.
Then it calls
.BR updwtmp ()
to append the structure to the wtmp file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/wtmp
database of past user logins
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
Not in POSIX.1-2001.
Present on Solaris, NetBSD, and perhaps other systems.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Both functions are available under glibc2, but not under libc5.
However,
.BR logwtmp ()
used to occur in the old libbsd.
These days, the
.BR logwtmp ()
function is included in libutil.
(Hence you'll need to add \fI\-lutil\fP
to your compiler command line to get it.)
.SH NOTES
For consistency with the other "utmpx" functions (see
.BR getutxent (3)),
glibc provides (since version 2.1):
.nf
.sp
.B #include <utmpx.h>
.sp
.BI "void updwtmpx (const char *" wtmpx_file ", const struct utmpx *" utx );
.fi
.PP
This function performs the same task as
.BR updwtmp (),
but differs in that it takes a
.I utmpx
structure as its last argument.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getutxent (3),
.BR wtmp (5)
