.\" Copyright (c) Bruno Haible <haible@clisp.cons.org>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   GNU glibc-2 source code and manual
.\"   Dinkumware C library reference http://www.dinkumware.com/
.\"   OpenGroup's Single Unix specification http://www.UNIX-systems.org/online.html
.\"
.TH WCSCASECMP 3 2010-09-15 "GNU" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
wcscasecmp \- compare two wide-character strings, ignoring case
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <wchar.h>
.sp
.BI "int wcscasecmp(const wchar_t *" s1 ", const wchar_t *" s2 );
.fi
.sp
.in -4n
Feature Test Macro Requirements for glibc (see
.BR feature_test_macros (7)):
.in
.sp
.BR wcscasecmp ():
.br
Since glibc 2.10: _POSIX_C_SOURCE\ >=\ 200809L || _XOPEN_SOURCE\ >=\ 700
.br
Before glibc 2.10:
_GNU_SOURCE
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR wcscasecmp ()
function is the wide-character equivalent of the
.BR strcasecmp (3)
function.
It compares the wide-character string pointed to
by \fIs1\fP and the wide-character string pointed to by \fIs2\fP, ignoring
case differences
.RB ( towupper (3),
.BR towlower (3)).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
The
.BR wcscasecmp ()
function returns zero if the wide-character strings at
\fIs1\fP and \fIs2\fP are equal except for case distinctions.
It returns a
positive integer if \fIs1\fP is greater than \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
It
returns a negative integer if \fIs1\fP is smaller
than \fIs2\fP, ignoring case.
.SH VERSIONS
The
.BR wcscasecmp ()
function is provided in glibc since version 2.1.
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
POSIX.1-2008.
This function is not specified in POSIX.1-2001,
and is not widely available on other systems.
.SH NOTES
The behavior of
.BR wcscasecmp ()
depends on the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the
current locale.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR strcasecmp (3),
.BR wcscmp (3)
